Although the organelles and large molecules in a cell can be visualized with microscopes, understanding how these components function requires a detailed biochemical analysis. Most biochemical procedures require obtaining large numbers of cells and then physically disrupting them to isolate their components. If the sample is a piece of tissue, composed of different types of cells, heterogeneous cell populations will be mixed together. To obtain as much information as possible about an individual cell type, biologists have developed ways of dissociating cells from tissues and separating the various types. These manipulations result in a relatively homogeneous population of cells that can then be analyzed either directly or after their number has been increased by allowing the cells to proliferate as a pure culture. Cells Can Be Isolated from a Tissue Suspension and Separated into Different Types. The first step in isolating cells of a uniform type from a tissue that contains a mixture of cell types is to disrupt the extracellular matrix that holds the cells together. The best yields of viable dissociated cells are usually obtained from fetal or neonatal tissues. The tissue sample is typically treated with proteolytic enzymes (such as trypsin and collagenase) to digest proteins in the extracellular matrix and with agents (such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, or EDTA) that bind, or chelate, the Ca 2+ on which cell-cell adhesion depends. The tissue can then be teased apart into single living cells by gentle agitation. Several approaches are used to separate the different cell types from a mixed cell suspension. One exploits differences in physical properties. Large cells can be separated from small cells and dense cells from light cells by centrifugation, for example. These techniques will be described below in connection with the separation of organelles and macromolecules, for which they were originally developed. Another approach is based on the tendency of some cell types to adhere strongly to glass or plastic, which allows them to be separated from cells that adhere less strongly.
