The incorporation of a radioactive precursor 3H-glucosamine in glycoconjugates, essentially glycosaminoglycans (GAG) was evaluated in the culture medium and cell fraction of human skin fibroblasts. Using increasing passage numbers, we could estimate the effect of in vitro aging on these biosynthetic activities. The incorporation in different free (hyaluronan) and protein bound (proteoglycans) GAGs was evaluated after specific enzymatic digestion. Most newly synthesized GAGs were excreted in the extracellular medium. Incorporation of the tracer in hyaluronan, the major biosynthetic product, increased with passage number but its titratable concentration decreased with in vitro aging, suggesting a rapid post-synthetic degradation. The proportion of chondroitin sulfates 4 (A) and 6 (C) and heparan sulfate decreased and that of dermatan sulfate increased with increasing passage number. We explored the modulation of these biosynthetic activities by the elastin laminin receptor. Using agonists (elastin peptides) and an antagonist (melibiose) of the receptor, their action on GAG biosynthesis was evaluated. Both elastin peptides and melibiose increased incorporation of the tracer in GAGs, but only melibiose inhibited post-synthetic degradation of hyaluronan, therefore increasing its concentration. The effect of passage number on the receptor mediated modulations was also investigated.
Solar elastosis is a hallmark of photoaged human skin and a prominent feature in experimentally produced photoaging in murine skin. The products of mast cells have been implicated in the development of photoaged skin. We evaluated whether products from mast cells mediate chronic UVB-induced changes in murine skin by employing a strain of mast cell-deficient mice, WWv. The responses in these mice were compared to those in BALB/c, another albino mouse strain. Mice were exposed three times per week to UVB radiation for 11 weeks; the total dose was 18.8 J/cm2. Irradiated WWv mice showed greater epidermal alterations than the irradiated BALB/c mice. In the dermis, a 3.6-fold increase in elastin content, as measured by desmosine, was produced in the UVB-treated BALB/c mice; in contrast, no difference was observed in elastin between UVB-treated and untreated WWv mice. Collagen content was not increased by UVB treatment in either strain, and the glycosaminoglycan content increased a similar amount in UVB-treated mice in both strains. The number of mast cells increased two-fold and the number of neutrophils increased six-fold in UVB-treated BALB/c mice compared to age-matched unirradiated controls. Neutrophils, as well as mast cells, were absent in untreated and UVB-treated WWv mouse skin. These results suggest that products of mast cells are important in the development of solar elastosis in murine skin either by directly inducing elastin production by fibroblasts or indirectly by mediating the presence of other cell types that produce products that increase fibroblast elastin production.
Pericellular proteolysis plays a pivotal function in cell invasion, a hallmark of tumor growth and metastasis. The minidegradome constituted of two matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), i.e. MMP-2 and MT1-MMP, associated with tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease-2 (TIMP-2) and integrin (alpha(v)beta(3)) or CD(44), is mainly involved in such invasive program. It catalyzes matrix degradation but, alternatively, proteolytic exposure of matricryptic sites or matrikines liberation by those enzymes regulates either positively or negatively tumor cell migration. That applies to types I and IV collagens, elastin, laminin 5, as described here, but such phenomenon might be extended to other matrix macromolecules. The development of tumors from epithelium origin is related to aging. Senescent fibroblasts are characterized by increased expression of MMPs, (particularly collagenase-1 (MMP-1) and stromelysin-1 (MMP-3)) and deposited matrix by those aged cells was shown to favor cancer cell growth. Thus, compositional variation of matrix-surrounding tumor cells, with formation of matricryptic sites and matrikines, can be considered as one main epigenetic factor contributing to tumor progression. A matrix-directed pharmacological approach in cancer is now emerging.
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, 1515 North Campbell Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.
Sensitized production of reactive oxygen species after photo-excitation of endogenous chromophores is thought to contribute to skin photo-oxidative stress. Here we present experimental evidence in support of a potential role of extracellular matrix proteins as skin photosensitizers. Human and bovine type I collagen and elastin sensitized of hydrogen peroxide generation upon irradiation with solar simulated light or ultraviolet A. Induction of intracellular oxidative stress by extracellular matrix-protein sensitization was demonstrated by flow cytometric analysis of fibroblasts preloaded with the intracellular redox dye dihydrorhodamine 123 and exposed to pre-irradiated type I collagen. Pre-irradiated collagen and elastin induced pronounced inhibition of proliferation in cultured keratinocytes and fibroblasts, which was reversed by antioxidant or catalase treatment and reproduced by exposure to concentrations of H2O2 formed during extracellular matrix-protein irradiation. In fibroblasts, chromosomal DNA damage as a consequence of collagen-sensitized H2O2 formation was demonstrated using a single cell electrophoresis assay. The enzymatic cross-links pyridinoline and desmosine were examined as candidate sensitizer chromophores contained in collagen and elastin, respectively. Pyridinoline, but not desmosine, sensitized light-driven H2O2 production and inhibition of fibroblast proliferation. Our results support the hypothesis that extracellular matrix proteins play a functional role in skin photoaging and carcinogenesis by sensitization of photo-oxidative damage.
Elastosis in breast--correlation with epithelial proliferation in benign disease and carcinomatous growth.
Elastosis in the breast is an unusual phenomenon and its morphogenesis has not yet been fully ascertained. The degree of elastosis in the breast associated with benign diseases, including fibroadenoma and fibrocystic disease as well as with breast carcinoma, was examined with special reference to the correlation between the degree of epithelial proliferation and elastosis. Using the immunohistochemical method, the presence of elastase (EL) and alpha 1-antichymotrypsin (ACT), one of the protease inhibitors, in these epithelial cells was also investigated to elucidate the role of an imbalance in these enzymes in the morphogenesis of the elastosis. Consequently, it was shown that there is a tendency in fibroadenoma and fibrocystic disease, for epithelial proliferation to be related to the degree of elastosis, and that the lack of EL in proliferated epithelial cells might play a role in the occurrence of elastosis, although ACT has no significant correlation. On the contrary, in our study noninvasive carcinoma showed marked periductal elastosis but no stromal elastosis, while invasive carcinoma showed various degrees of periductal and stromal elastosis. In invasive carcinoma, especially scirrhous carcinoma, the degree of ACT in cancer cells correlated well with stromal elastosis, although there was no correlation with EL. These findings suggest that an imbalance of the protease-antiprotease system, produced by epithelial cells of the breast, contribute to the morphogenesis of elastosis, although the physiological event, aging, is only marginally related to elastosis. Further investigation of the cells producing elastin and regulatory factors may be necessary.
Aged, 80 and over
The changes of the arteries appearing diffusely caused by ageing as a rule favour the development of the focal arteriosclerotic changes. Already due to the increasing blood lipid level the ageing vessel is exposed to increased loads. It is more difficult for it to cope with them, since caused by ageing the cell functions of endothelium, intima and adjacent media decrease, whereas the diffundibility increases. The alterations of the mucopolysaccharide spectre in old age also render difficult the maintenance of the integrity of the arterial wall. The decrease of the distensibility of the arterial wall, partly consequence of increasing cross-linking, partly expression of senile fibrosis, is partially compensated by dilatation of the vascular tube. When arteriosclerotic beds supervene on account of solidification caused by old age additional difficulties appear. On principle the genuine changes caused by old age smooth the way for the development of arteriosclerotic changes.
Cell-matrix interactions in the genesis of arteriosclerosis and atheroma. Effect of aging.
The progression of atheroarteriosclerosis was shown to be age dependent. This designation covers two separate entities: arteriosclerosis, the progressive and diffuse hardening of the walls of arteries with loss of elasticity, and atheromatous plaque formation, which can start early in life according to nutrition and genetic factors (LDL-receptor expression). Lipoprotein-receptor interactions play a crucial role in lipidic plaque formation. There is, however, no indication that the diffuse hardening of the vascular wall would also be influenced by these mechanisms. We described recently a high-affinity receptor for elastin peptides, present on smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts, and also on monocytes and PMNs. When activated, this receptor will increase intracellular calcium. Circulating elastin peptides were determined by a sensitive Elisa method and found to be between 0.1 and 20 micrograms/ml, in the range of activation of the elastin receptor. They increase in obliterative arteriopathies and type IIb hyperlipidemia. Elastolysis accompanies aging and vascular pathology; the sensitivity of this receptor changes with age, intracellular Ca++ increases, but the receptor appears to be uncoupled from its normal transmission mechanism. These results may well explain the increasing diffuse calcification of the vessel wall. The previously demonstrated potentiation of cholesterol deposition in elastic fibers by calcium is in agreement with simultaneous deposition of calcium and lipids. The recent demonstration of the efficient competition of fibronectin for LDL in proteoglycan-LDL complexes suggests that this reaction may be involved in foam cell formation by the opsonization of LDL for phagocytosis. Fibronectin was shown to accumulate in atherosclerotic plaques. Altogether these recent results confirm the importance of cell-matrix interactions in atherogenesis and lead to a better understanding of the age dependence of these disease processes.
Age dependence of the biosynthesis of intercellular matrix macromolecules of rabbit aorta in organ culture and cell culture.
The age dependence of the relative rate of biosynthesis of intercellular matrix macromolecules was studied in organ culture and cell culture obtained from aortas of newborn, young and adult rabbits. In organ culture there was a strong decrease with age of the rate of incorporation of (14C)-lysine and (3H)-glucosamine in all macromolecular fractions. Neosynthesis of elastin could be demonstrated by the isolation of labelled demosine at all ages. In cell cultures derived from newborn and adult aortas, no decrease in total incorporation was noticed. The pattern of synthesis and secretion of glycosaminoglycans and glycoproteins did however change with age. These results suggest the existence of matrix-dependent and of a matrix-independent regulation of the relative rate of synthesis of matrix macromolecules.
The physiological significance of the reaction between elastin and elastomucase in relation to the production of clearing factor.
Collagen and elastin: the effect of age on their relationship.
Role of the extracellular matrix in age-related modifications of the rat aorta. Ultrastructural, morphometric, and enzymatic evaluations.
Connective tissues such as blood vessels are known to be greatly affected by age because of impaired functional properties and increased susceptibility to diseases. With the aim of providing further information on the role of the extracellular matrix in age-related modifications, we investigated the aorta in the rat model from birth to senescence by means of morphological and morphometric observations and by evaluation of lysyl oxidase activity. Results focused on the dramatic vascular rearrangements due to progressive fibrosis of the extracellular matrix and on prominent elastin modifications. The presence of lysyl oxidase activity, even in the oldest animals, might be at least partly responsible for the increased stiffness of the aging extracellular matrix. The striking age-related remodeling of the aortic architecture and the alterations of the interactions between cellular and extracellular compartments might greatly influence the functional properties of the arterial wall in senescence, at least contributing to the consequences of some apparently age-related vascular disorders.
Elastic properties and composition of the aortic wall in old spontaneously hypertensive rats.
We hypothesized that age-linked changes in the composition and elastic properties of the arterial wall occur earlier in hypertensive than in normotensive rats. We evaluated the consequences of hypertension and aging on aortic mechanics, geometry, and composition in 3-, 9-, and 15-month-old awake Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY) (normotensive) and spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) (hypertensive). The elastic modulus of the thoracic aorta, calculated from aortic pulse wave velocity and geometry, was higher in young and adult SHR than in age-matched WKY, as was wall stress; however, isobaric pulse wave velocity and pulse wave velocity-pressure curves were similar. Elastic modulus, isobaric pulse wave velocity, and the slope of the pulse wave velocity-pressure curve dramatically increased in old SHR compared with age-matched WKY; there was no further elevation of blood pressure or wall thickness. Fibrosis did not develop with age in SHR, and the ratio of elastin to collagen decreased in a similar fashion with aging in both strains. In conclusion, although elastic properties of the aortic wall are not intrinsically modified in young and adult SHR in comparison to age-matched WKY, aging is associated with a dramatic stiffening of the aortic wall in old SHR but not in WKY. Changes in blood pressure, aortic wall geometry, or scleroprotein composition do not appear to explain this age-linked aortic stiffening in SHR, suggesting that other mechanisms of disorganization of the media may be involved.
Connective tissue V. Comparison of synthesis and turnover of collagen and elastin in tissues of rat at several ages.
Dacron arterial prostheses, treated or not with biopolymers (gelatin, glycosaminoglycans) were implanted in the abdominal aorta of dogs and the connective tissue synthetised inside and outside the prosthesis was studied. After 3 and 9 months of implantation the prosthesis, a joining portion and a piece of aorta were excised and put in organ culture with 14C-lysine for 3 days. Representative macromolecular extracts were then obtained by a  "chemical dissection" procedure. The radioactivity and the chemical composition of these extracts was studied. The DNA content of the prosthesis was higher than that of the adjacent aorta showing a dense cellular repopulation of the prosthesis. This was confirmed by histology also which revealed the presence of a newly formed limiting elastic membrane and the presence of numerous elastic fibrils. Collagen, elastin and glycosaminoglycans could be detected in the macromolecular extracts showing that the cells which repopulated the prosthesis expressed a complete biosynthetic capacity as far as matrix macromolecules are concerned. The distribution of proteins in the extracts was as follows: 4% of total proteins were extracted in a 1M CaCl2-buffer 80% of total proteins in the collagenase extracts, 10% in the 6M urea extract. Only 0,2% of proteins were in the final elastase extract, 10 times less than in the joining aorta fragment. The proportion of the other proteins was similar in aorta and in the prosthesis as well as the chemical composition (hexosamine and hydroxyproline content) of the extracts. The proportion of collagenase-extractable proteins decreased with the time of implantation (from 3 to 9 months) and the proportion of urea-extractable proteins increased. This type of modification is similar to that found in aging aorta wall. 14C-lysine was actively incorporated in all macromolecular fractions studied. The incorporation pattern of the prothesis tissue was similar to that found for the joining host aorta, showing a similar regulatory tendency for matrix macromolecules. It appears therefore that a valid hemocompatible vascular type of connective tissue can be synthesised on the dacron arterial prosthesis and nature of this connective tissue can be influenced by previous biopolymer treatment of the synthetic prosthesis. The described procedure (incorporation of labelled precursors in organ culture) appears to be a valid method for the exploration of the regulatory processes underlying the synthetic capacity for matrix macromolecules of the newly formed tissue in the synthetic prosthesis.
Staining and Labeling*
Twelve peripheral arteries are described in 59 patients of all ages. Accumulation of ground substance in the media, accompanied by small foci of calcification of the internal elastic lamina, was found in the large leg arteries of young adults, and progressively in a wider series of arteries throughout life. This picture showed no relationship to hypertension, to Mönckeberg's sclerosis, or to the development of atheroma. A notable quantity of ground substance may be a feature of early intimal development, and of a thickened intima in adult life, and probably the major constituent of an organizing thrombus. Organizing thrombi were apparently incidental findings at several sites even in young adults, and showed no association with the state of the arterial wall beneath the lesion, the wall being in fact normal, though accumulated mucopolysaccharide was always present. Atheroma increases with age, and its focal incidence gives way to confluence in the arteries of the leg. Occlusive peripheral artery atheroma was found only in cases where the cause of death was severe atheroma, e.g., coronary artery disease and abdominal aortic aneurysm, or in myxoedema, in which the incidence of occlusive lesions may differ from that in severe generalized atheroma. Elastic tissue is described in all coats of the artery wall, with some variants of the common pattern. The musculo-elastic cushion is not seen after adolescence, and it is suggested that the cushion represents the growing point of the artery. Longitudinal muscle bundles are almost confined to the popliteal artery, where they may form an essential buttress for a large branching artery subject to unusual external stresses. The functions and origin of the ground substance are discussed.
The cardiovascular system is one of those target-organ systems of senescence where the effects of physiological ageing meet the consequences, accumulated with time, of pathological disorders. In man, these two processes are not easily disentangled, and despite the advances achieved in ultrasonic techniques the approach of structural parameters remains difficult. On the other hand, the morphological and functional unicity of the vascular wall in different species is such that observations made in animals are relevant. In rats, the structure-function relationship can be determined by histomorphometric analysis of the myocardium and vascular wall under standardized conditions of treatment. As the animals get older, the cardiac mass, related or not to body-weight, increases while the cardiac efficacy decreases. Hypertrophy of the heart is accompanied by a change in the enzymatic property of myosin. Simultaneously, the walls of the greater arteries become thicker, more rigid and less compliant, hypertrophy of the smooth muscle cells being an essential component of vascular wall thickening. At the same time, the collagen fraction and the amount of collagen-bound calcium increase. The elastic component decreases, at least relatively, and the elastin-collagen ratio clearly diminishes with age. Altogether, these alterations are not different from those observed in human arterial hypertension. They result in a lesser permeability of the tunica media, facilitate the accumulation in the subendothelium of lipidic and/or proteinic compounds originating in plasma and constitute a link between ageing and atheromatous processes.
The high-pressure systemic arterial network plays a major physiological role as it buffers the impact of the blood flow wave generated by the left ventricle and transforms it into a more continuous flow in the peripheral arterioles. In ageing processes unrelated to hypertensive or vascular disease the structural properties of the arterial network are significantly altered. The collagen, elastin and smooth muscle contents of the tunica media and the geometrical arrangement of arterial wall components are constantly modified according to the subject's age. These morphometric changes are responsible for changes in the mechanical properties of the arterial walls leading to rigidity. An increase in caliber of the arterial lumen has been found in all studies; it partially compensates for the effects of arterial wall rigidity on vascular compliance, thereby limiting the haemodynamic and functional changes that occur in blood circulation.
Patients had one pulsed dye laser (585 nm) treatment. The treated areas were assessed by the following methods: grading of skin wrinkles at 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6-14 months after treatment by blinded observers and by light and electron microscopy.
An ambulatory care center at Abbott Northwestern Hospital (ANH) and the Laser &amp; Skin Surgery Center of Northern California (LSSCNC).
Twenty patients were treated, half with mild to moderate and half with moderate to severe sun induced skin wrinkles.
At last follow up 90% (9/10) of the mild to moderate wrinkles and 40% (4/10) of the treated patients with moderate to severe wrinkles had clinically observable improvement in their sun induced skin wrinkles. Histologic examinations of the treated areas showed a superficial dermal band of well organized elastin and collagen fibers replacing pre-treatment elastic tissue. Increased cellularity and mucin deposition was consistent with dermal collagen remodeling.
Staining and Labeling*
Highly purified elastin was prepared from bovine ligamentum nuchae by hot alkali extraction. Antisera to the protein, developed against suspensions or acid solubilized preparations, were obtained from rabbits and guinea pigs. Of a large number of proteins, only insoluble elastin (from the aortae of several animal species) and tropoelastin, the putative soluble precursor, reacted with the antisera as determined by double antibody radioimmunoassay. Nanogram quantities of insoluble elastin can be detected following solubilization of the protein by brief acid treatment. Tropoelastin can be determined in the microgram range. The radioimmunoassay should permit determination in tissues, in fluids, and in in vitro cultures of soluble, newly synthesized elastin, mature insoluble elastin, and intermediate forms of the fibrous protein which may have heretofore escaped detection. A sensitive assay for elastin should also permit the acquisition of information concerned with connective tissue turnover during development, aging, and disease.
Institute for Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8.
We previously reported changes in mechanical properties and collagen cross-linking of the ovine thoracic aorta during perinatal development and postnatal maturation, and we now report changes in biochemical composition (elastin, collagen, and DNA contents per mg wet wt) over the same developmental intervals. A comparison of results from the present and previous studies has yielded novel and important observations concerning the relationship between aortic mechanics and composition during maturation. Developmental changes in aortic incremental elastic modulus at low tensile stress (E(low)) closely followed changes in relative elastin content (i.e., per mg wet wt). An 89% increase in E(low) during the perinatal period was associated with a 69% increase in relative elastin content, whereas neither variable changed during postnatal life. Incremental elastic modulus at high tensile stress (E(high)) did not change during the perinatal period but increased 88% during postnatal life. This pattern closely paralleled changes in collagen cross-linking index, which did not change perinatally but almost doubled postnatally. In contrast, relative collagen content (per mg wet wt) increased only slightly from fetal to adult life, a trend that was unrelated to aortic mechanics. Substantial, progressive decreases in measures of wall viscosity (pressure wave attenuation coefficient and viscoelastic phase angle) from fetal to adult life followed the pattern observed for relative DNA (smooth muscle cell) content (per mg wet wt). Our findings suggest that accumulation of elastin per milligram wet weight contributes most to developmental changes in E(low), change in collagen cross-linking is the primary determinant of developmental changes in E(high), and cell accumulation contributes most to developmental changes in wall viscosity.
Embryonic and Fetal Development/physiology
Staining and Labeling*
The hairless mouse model of photoaging: evaluation of the relationship between dermal elastin, collagen, skin thickness and wrinkles.
Quantitative and qualitative changes in dermal collagen and elastin occur in response to chronic ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. These changes have been implicated in the genesis of the wrinkling seen in chronically irradiated, or photoaged skin. We examined the relationship between wrinkle formation and changes in dermal structural protein content and type. Skh-1 hairless mice were irradiated with suberythemal doses of UV-B three times a week for up to 20 wk. Visible wrinkling was present after 6-7 wk of irradiation. Dermal elastic fiber content was quantified by color image analysis of paraffin-embedded tissue. There was no significant difference in dermal elastic fiber content between irradiated and age-matched control mice after either 10 or 20 wk of irradiation. The effect of UV-B irradiation on total dermal collagen content, ratio of collagen type III-type I, and extent of glycosylation and crosslinking of collagen was no different in irradiated and age-matched control mice after 10 wk of irradiation. Increased epidermal thickness was evident in frozen sections after 6 wk of irradiation, and the thickness increased with continued irradiation. Dermal thickening was evident after 10 wk of irradiation. Sufficient UV-B irradiation will eventually cause changes in dermal elastin and collagen content; however, wrinkle formation precedes such changes. A causal relationship between wrinkle formation and dermal structural protein content changes in Skh-1 hairless mice could not be established in this study.
Long-lived structural proteins, collagen and elastin, undergo continual non-enzymatic crosslinking during aging and in diabetic individuals. This abnormal protein crosslinking is mediated by advanced glycation end products (AGEs) generated by non-enzymatic glycosylation of proteins by glucose. The AGE-derived protein crosslinking of structural proteins contributes to the complications of long-term diabetes such as nephropathy, retinopathy, and neuropathy. AGE-crosslinks have also been implicated in age-related cardiovascular diseases. Potential treatment strategies for these AGE-derived complications include prevention of AGE-formation and breaking of the existing AGE-crosslinks. The therapeutic potential of the AGE-inhibitor, pimagedine (aminoguanidine), has been extensively investigated in animal models and in Phase 3 clinical trials. This review presents the pre-clinical and clinical studies using ALT-711, a highly potent AGE-crosslink breaker that has the ability to reverse already-formed AGE-crosslinks. Oral administration of ALT-711 has resulted in a rapid improvement in the elasticity of stiffened myocardium in experimental animals. Topical administration of ALT-711 was effective in improving the skin hydration of aged rats. The therapeutic potential of crosslink breakers for cardiovascular complications and dermatological alterations associated with aging and diabetes is discussed.
Distribution of myocilin and extracellular matrix components in the corneoscleral meshwork of human eyes.
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.
To examine ultrastructurally the composition of major extracellular matrix (ECM) components and the distribution of myocilin in the trabecular lamellae of corneoscleral (CS) meshwork in normal human eyes. The codistribution of myocilin with ECM components was also investigated.
Postembedding immunoelectron microscopic studies were performed with antibodies against myocilin and other ECM components, including fibronectin, laminin, vitronectin, tenascin, elastin, fibrillin-1, microfibril-associated glycoprotein (MAGP)-1, decorin, versican, hyaluronic acid, and five types of collagen (I, III, IV, V, and VI). Double labeling of myocilin with other ECM components was performed with different sized gold particles.
In the trabecular beams of CS meshwork, fibronectin, laminin, and collagen type IV were associated with basement membranes, whereas elastin was specifically localized to the core of elastic-like fibers. Several types of collagens, glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and hyaluronic acid were detected both in the collagen fibers and ground substances. Myocilin predominantly localized in the long-spacing collagens and sheath materials surrounding elastic-like fibers, codistributed with fibronectin, fibrillin-1, MAGP-1, decorin, and type VI collagen.
This study illustrated the composition of ECM materials in the trabecular lamellae of CS meshwork. Myocilin was specifically localized to long-spacing collagens and the surrounding sheath of elastic-like fibers interacting with microfibril-associated elements where changes have been documented to occur in glaucomatous and aging eyes.
Photoageing shows histological features of chronic skin inflammation without clinical and molecular abnormalities.
Photodamage is characterized by degradation of collagen and accumulation of abnormal elastin in the superficial dermis. Mast cells and macrophages, which are found in higher numbers in photoaged skin, have been implicated in this process.
Chronically sun-exposed (preauricular) and control sun-protected (postauricular) skin was recovered from eight healthy subjects undergoing cosmetic surgery (facial lifting).
Histological analysis showed that sun-exposed skin harboured more infiltrating mononuclear cells than sun-protected skin. Cellular infiltrates were found at the periphery of areas of elastolysis around hair follicles in sun-exposed sites, whereas they were found in the interfollicular dermis around blood vessels and around hair follicles in sun-protected samples. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed an increased number of mast cells, macrophages and CD4+ CD45RO+ T cells in sun-exposed dermis as well as a higher number of CD1a+ dendritic cells in sun-exposed epidermis, compared with the sun-protected samples. Thus photoageing displays histological features of chronic skin inflammation. However, no molecular sign of inflammation was observed and we even found a decreased expression of interleukin-1beta mRNA in sun-exposed compared with sun-protected sites. Furthermore, the patients' skin looked normal and did not display any clinical inflammation.
Age-dependent remodeling of connective tissue: role of fibronectin and laminin.
Connective tissues differ from other tissues in their more abundant extracellular matrix (ECM). This matrix is composed of a relatively large number of macromolecules interacting with each other as well as with the cells they are surrounding. Such cells, fibroblasts, chondrocytes and others, secrete the macromolecules of ECM according to a genetically and environmentally regulated "program". It appeared recently that one type of macromolecular interactions is characterized by the selective cleavage of some of the ECM components. Some of these proteolytic cleavage products were shown to possess remarkable biological activities absent from the parent molecules. Such mechanisms were shown to play an important role in aging processes. Also called matricryptins such peptides and their activities are produced from several matrix components. Of special interest are these matricryptins which are derived from fibronectin, laminin and elastin. Their production by proteolytic attack of the original ECM components, followed by their novel biological activities, form in some instances autoamplifying vicious circles. Such "epigenetic", post-translational mechanisms are not coded in the genome, they are neither "accidental", nor "chaotic" but remarkably predictable, the result of the presence in several ECM components of "matricryptic" sites and coregulated synthesis of matrix components carrying such sites and of proteolytic enzymes producing the matricryptins. Some examples will be discussed, derived from the experiments carried out in our laboratory and others over the years, involved in aging and in some of the age-dependent pathologies.
Down-regulation of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloprotease-1 (TIMP-1) in aged human skin contributes to matrix degradation and impaired cell growth and survival.
Up regulation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), particularly collagenase-1 (MMP-1), stromelysin-1 (MMP-3) and gelatinase A (MMP-2) is responsible for the lysis of dermal collagen and elastin fibers during chronological skin aging. Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) is one representative of the natural MMP inhibitor family, encompassing four members. Its expression is decreased with fibroblast senescence, both ex vivo and in vivo, thus contributing to increased catabolic activity within dermis. TIMP-1 displays multiple biological functions. It inhibits most MMPs, except membrane-type MMP subfamily, with Ki in the subnanomolar range, but also interacts with the hemopexin-like (PEX) domain of pro MMP-9. Besides, it exhibits keratinocyte and fibroblast growth factor-like activity and has been described as a cell survival factor.
We have previously shown that fetal growth restriction (FGR) during late gestation in sheep affects lung development in the near-term fetus and at 8 wk after birth. In the present study, our aim was to determine the effects of FGR on the structure of the lungs at 2 y after birth; our hypothesis was that changes observed at 8 wk after birth would persist until maturity. FGR was induced in sheep by umbilicoplacental embolization, which was maintained from 120 d until delivery at term (approximately 147 d); birth weights of FGR lambs were 41% lower than in controls. At 2 y after birth, body and lung weights were not different, but there were 28% fewer alveoli and alveoli were significantly larger than in controls; hence there was a 10% reduction in the internal surface area relative to lung volume in FGR sheep compared with controls. The lungs of FGR sheep, compared with controls, had thicker interalveolar septa as a result of increased extracellular matrix deposition; the alveolar blood-air barrier was also thicker, largely because of an 82% increase in basement membrane thickness. These changes are qualitatively similar to those observed at 8 wk. Our data show that structural alterations in the lungs induced by FGR that were apparent at 8 wk were still evident at 2 y after birth, indicating that FGR may result in permanent changes in the structure of the lungs of the offspring and may affect respiratory health and lung aging later in life.
Elastin was purified in a multistep procedure designed to remove contaminating proteins and to avoid induced racemization. As a control experiment, elastin was also purified from the richest elastin bearing tissue, the yellow ligaments of the spine.
In total skin, specimens displayed a slight age-dependent increase in d-aspartyl residues, but in purified elastin the rate of increase was rapid and highly correlated with age (r = 0.98). Similar rates were observed in the control data from the yellow ligaments. The AAR rates were found to be higher in elastin from skin (and yellow ligaments) than previous studies of lung parenchyma and from aorta had shown. These differences appear to be related to the purity of the extracted elastin product, and to a significant in vivo degradation of elastin in skin.
The age-dependent accumulation of modified aspartic acid residues appears to be a common feature in ageing elastin, independent of the tissue source. This indicates a lack of turnover and an accumulation of elastin damage in diverse ageing tissues, possibly as part of programmed ageing.
Aged, 80 and over
Arterial calcification. Mechanisms, consequences and animal models.
The arterial extracellular matrix undergoes many profound age-related changes leading to an increase in wall stiffness. In this review the evidence suggesting that calcium--and more importantly "calcification" of elastin fibres--is involved in the age-related increase in arterial stiffness is examined.
Relation of serum elastin peptide concentration to age, FEV1, smoking habits, alcohol consumption, and protease inhibitor phenotype: an epidemiological study in working men.
The relation of elastin peptide concentration to some factors closely related to pulmonary emphysema (age, smoking habits, FEV1 alpha protease inhibitor (PI) phenotype) and to alcohol consumption was examined in an epidemiological study of 310 working men. The elastin peptides used for obtaining antibodies and as reference in an ELISA assay were prepared from chemically hydrolysed elastin.
The elastin peptide concentration significantly decreased with age from 2.92 (1.54) micrograms/ml among subjects younger than 30 years to 2.18 (1.14) micrograms/ml among subjects older than 50. Elastin peptide concentration did not differ with smoking habits and was clearly unrelated to FEV1. A lower elastin peptide concentration was observed in all groups of subjects with a protease inhibitor phenotype other than PI MM (PI FM, IM, MP, MS, MZ, and S phenotypes).
The results cast doubts on the usefulness of the elastin peptide concentration as a marker of lung destruction in middle aged, predominantly healthy men. Blood elastin peptide concentration may reflect both elastin degradation and resynthesis. The results of this analysis suggest that several factors (age, alcohol consumption, non-PI MM phenotype) may be associated with decreased resynthesis of lung elastin. Further studies, conducted in various age groups and including estimates of the degree of lung destruction, are needed to unravel the mechanisms underlying lysis and resynthesis of lung elastin.
Manders EK
Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey 17033.
A 42-year-old woman with pronounced skin laxity of her neck underwent a rhytidectomy and was found to have pseudoxanthoma elasticum-like changes of her skin. Her medical history was significant for Wilson's disease, requiring that she take penicillamine for 26 years. In patients on long-term penicillamine therapy, 20% to 33% will develop a dermatopathy. The drug has been used to alter scar formation in various surgical conditions. Penicillamine is known to alter cross-linking of elastin and collagen fibers. A review of the literature reveals other penicillamine-related dermatopathies that may present to the surgeon.
On the accumulation of D-aspartate in elastin and other proteins of the ageing aorta.
Department of Biochemistry, Charing Cross and Westminster Medical School, London, UK.
Ageing and degenerative changes of the human aorta are associated with medial thinning and a reduced dry weight content of elastin. The metabolic stability of cross-linked elastin was investigated by measuring the accumulation of D-aspartate with ageing in insoluble elastin isolated from human aorta. D-Aspartate accumulation in elastin was compared with D-aspartate accumulation in aortic collagen and an elastin bound glycoprotein fraction. The D-aspartate content of elastin, purified from infrarenal aorta; increased linearly with age from 3% of the total aspartate in youth to 13% in the mid 80s. In contrast the D-aspartate content of aortic collagen remained invariant (3-5% of the total aspartate) from youth to old age. The apparent first order rate constant for the racemization of L-aspartate in elastin was 1.14 x 10(-3). The D-aspartate content of the elastin bound glycoproteins increased by only a small amount, from 3% in the mid 30s to 6% in the mid 80s. These results argue for the metabolic stability of aortic elastin as compared with the fibrillar collagens of the human aorta. Both the rate of racemization and the specific accumulation of D-aspartate in elastin, but not collagen, indicates that mature cross-linked elastin is not synthesized in the adult aorta.
Aneurysm: prevention and nonsurgical repair.
The approximately 4000 'normal' mammals that synthesize ascorbic acid produce on average circa 50 mg/kg per day routinely. Although humans have the same needs as normal mammals, they do not produce ascorbic acid at all and, on average, ingest only circa 1 mg/kg per day. The normal mammals' much larger production enables them to continually renew structural proteins, including both collagen, a flexible but inelastic tissue, and elastin, the elastic connective tissue. As a result, many normal mammals maintain a 'youthful' appearance with little gross anatomical change from age of maturity (i.e, first estrus) to more than 20 times age of maturity. In stark contrast, the extremely small ascorbic acid intake of humans does not enable them to maintain a youthful flexibility and elasticity beyond possibly 6 times age of maturity (most have died before 8 times). This loss of youthful qualities in structural proteins results in susceptibility for many forms of deterioration in both appearance and properties of vascular and other structural tissues. One such deterioration is aortic aneurysm, a common cause of morbidity and mortality. We hypothesize herein that improved dietary intake of essential nutrients needed to enhance the renewal of all structural proteins can: (1). prevent this deterioration completely; and (2). cure even large aortic aneurysms without surgery.
High-dose long wave visible light induces perinuclear vacuolization in vivo but does not result in early photoageing and apoptosis.
Department of Dermatology, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, The Netherlands. M.Tjioe@derma.umcn.nl
With the advancing widespread use of photodynamic therapy, questions have arisen about the necessity to protect the adjacent healthy skin from high-dose long-wave light. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of high dose visible light on the skin of healthy volunteers with focus on apoptosis, DNA damage, inflammation, melanogenesis and induction of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP). Fourteen healthy volunteers were included and irradiated daily on their buttocks with 1300 kJ/m2 long wave visible light (560-780 nm) on five consecutive days with a cumulative dose of 6500 kJ/m2. In each volunteer six biopsies were taken before and 24 h after irradiation on days 1, 2, 3 and 5 and on day 8 and 12. Frozen and paraffin sections were investigated by measuring parameters for photodamage (apoptosis, p53, phosphorylated c-Jun), skin ageing (phosphorylated c-Jun, MMP-1, elastin content) melanogenesis (Melan A). Although no sunburn cells were seen, a significant increase in perinuclear vacuolization was noted (P &lt; 0.0003) from day 5 till 7 days after the last irradiation. There was no expression of phosphorylated c-Jun, whereas the expression of p53, Melan A, MMP-1 and elastin content did not change. High-dose visible light induces a significant increase in perinuclear vacuolization, but does not result in apoptosis, photodamage or early induction of skin ageing.
Berman-Gund Laboratory for the Study of Retinal Degenerations, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts Eye &amp; Ear Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
Elastic fibers are components of the extracellular matrix and confer resilience. Once laid down, they are thought to remain stable, except in the uterine tract where cycles of active remodeling occur. Loss of elastic fibers underlies connective tissue aging and important diseases including emphysema. Failure to maintain elastic fibers is explained by a theory of antielastase-elastase imbalance, but little is known about the role of renewal. Here we show that mice lacking the protein lysyl oxidase-like 1 (LOXL1) do not deposit normal elastic fibers in the uterine tract post partum and develop pelvic organ prolapse, enlarged airspaces of the lung, loose skin and vascular abnormalities with concomitant tropoelastin accumulation. Distinct from the prototypic lysyl oxidase (LOX), LOXL1 localizes specifically to sites of elastogenesis and interacts with fibulin-5. Thus elastin polymer deposition is a crucial aspect of elastic fiber maintenance and is dependent on LOXL1, which serves both as a cross-linking enzyme and an element of the scaffold to ensure spatially defined deposition of elastin.
Trichloroacetic acid peeling versus dermabrasion: a histometric, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural comparison.
Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) chemical peel and dermabrasion are beneficial methods for treatment of photoaged skin.
Routine histopathology coupled with histometric computer-assisted image analysis was used to assess epidermal changes. Alcian blue stain was used to evaluate changes in glycosaminoglycans. Immunoperoxidase techniques with antibodies against types I and III collagen and elastin were used to evaluate quantitatively changes in collagen and elastic fibers, and their ultrastructure was examined by transmission electron microscopy.
Similar histologic, immunohistochemical, as well as ultrastructural changes were observed in the two groups, including epidermal and dermal rejuvenation with new collagen deposition and normalization of the elastic tissue. However, these changes were more prominent in patients treated with dermabrasion than those treated with TCA.
The results of this study suggest that beneficial effects of such modalities on facial skin were accomplished primarily by increasing the amounts of collagen I and collagen III and improving the morphologic appearance of collagen and elastic fibers.
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation damages skin through a variety of mechanisms, including the generation of free radicals. Gluconolactone is a polyhydroxy acid (PHA) that is capable of chelating metals and may also function by scavenging free radicals, thereby protecting skin from some of the damaging effects of UV radiation.
Gluconolactone provided up to 50% protection against UV radiation, as measured in our in vitro system, and did not significantly increase sunburn cells in human skin.
These results demonstrate the ability of the PHA gluconolactone to protect against UV radiation-induced elastin promoter activation. In addition, in vivo studies demonstrated that gluconolactone treatment does not result in a significant increase in sunburn cells. Further investigation of this and other PHAs is necessary to identify their potential role in preventing and repairing cutaneous photodamage.
High levels of desmosines in urine and plasma of patients with pseudoxanthoma elasticum.
Università di Pavia, Pavia, and Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), a rare heritable disorder caused by mutations of the ABCC6 gene, is characterized by fragmentation and mineralization of elastic fibres. We determined the extent of degradation of elastin by measuring and comparing the amount of desmosines in plasma and urine of PXE patients, healthy carriers and normal subjects.
Using capillary electrophoresis with laser-induced fluorescence detection (CE-LIF) we measured the amount of desmosines in the urine of 46 individuals (14 PXE patients, 17 healthy carriers and 15 controls) and in the plasma of 56 subjects (18 PXE patients, 23 healthy carriers and 15 controls). Pseudoxanthoma elasticum patients and carriers were identified by clinical, structural and molecular biology analyses.
The urinary excretion of desmosines was two-fold higher in PXE patients than in controls (P &lt; 0.01); the values for healthy carriers were intermediate between those of PXE patients and controls. A very similar trend between patients and their relatives was observed for plasma desmosines. There was a significant correlation between the amount of the desmosines in plasma and urine. Moreover, a positive correlation was observed between urinary desmosine content and age of the patients as well as between urinary desmosine content and severity of clinical manifestations.
Both the urinary and plasma desmosine concentrations indicate that elastin degradation is higher in PXE patients and, to a lesser extent, in healthy carriers than in normal subjects. Data seem to indicate that the amount of elastin breakdown products correlates with the age of patients as well as with the severity of the disease.
Quantitative analysis of collagen and elastin cross-links using a single-column system.
The separation of both the immature and mature cross-links present in collagen together with the stable cross-links of elastin has been achieved on a single ion-exchange column. This technique avoids the current necessity for two different systems, ion-exchange and high-performance liquid chromatography-fluorescence techniques. The value of the method is illustrated by the comparison of the cross-link contents of aging bovine skin, from foetal to old age.
The influence of aging and aortic stiffness on permanent dilation and breaking stress of the thoracic descending aorta.
Department of Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.groenink@amc.uva.nl
To assess the influence of aging and aortic stiffness on the extent of irreversible deformation and breaking stress of the human thoracic aorta.
From 14 human heart valve donors without aortic disease (mean age 35 years, range 8-59 years), 14 intact segments of the thoracic descending aorta were studied within 48 h after cardiac arrest. In an experimental setup, the segments were submitted to increasing hydrostatic pressure loads, both statically and dynamically, while radius and wall thickness were monitored echocardiographically. Pressure-radius curves were constructed. Radius and wall thickness were determined at a pressure of 100 mmHg. Radius at elastin resting length and collagen recruitment pressure (Pcol, mmHg) were derived from the pressure-radius relationship and stress-strain curves were constructed to yield Young's moduli of elastin and collagen. Distensibility (D, mmHg-1) was determined while loading the segment with a sinusoidal pressure wave of 120/50 mmHg at both 0.5 and 1 Hz. Subsequently increasing static pressure loads of 400, 800, 1200 and 1600 mmHg were applied. After each pressure load, the increase in aortic radius at a pressure of 100 mmHg (Rinc) was determined. The experiment continued until rupture occurred and breaking stress (sigma break, N m-2) was calculated, donor age and aortic stiffness were correlated with Rinc and sigma break of the aortic segments.
Mean breaking stress of the 14 segments was 2.7 x 10(6) N m-2. Breaking stress was negatively correlated with age (r2 = 0.66) and positively with D (r2 = 0.44) and with Pcol (r2 = 0.18). Seven segments survived a pressure load of 800 mmHg, in these vessels, the extent of irreversible dilation was positively correlated with age (r2 = 0.42) and negatively with D (r2 = 0.40) and Pcol (r2 = 0.40).
Permanent deformation and rupture of the human thoracic aorta following pressure overload are influenced by age, distensibility and collagen recruitment pressure.
Overlapping, complementary and site-specific expression pattern of genes of the EMILIN/Multimerin family.
Department of Histology, Microbiology and Medical Biotechnologies, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
The EDEN gene superfamily comprises genes that contain the EMI domain, a structural motif recently identified in proteins of the extracellular matrix. We report here the detailed expression pattern of genes of the EMILIN/Multimerin family, the most numerous group of EDEN superfamily, during mouse development. In situ hybridization has revealed that the EMILIN/Multimerin genes are particularly expressed in the cardio-vascular system and in mesenchymal cells. In general, the territories of expression of each gene are partially overlapping or complementary with that of other members of the family and, usually, more than one gene of the family is active in different tissues, consistent with the possibility of functional compensation. The analysis is particularly relevant in the interpretation of gene targeting experiments.
Embryonic and Fetal Development
The effect of full-face broadband light treatments alone and in combination with bilateral crow's feet Botulinum toxin type A chemodenervation.
Broadband light (BBL; Intense Pulsed Light; Lumenis Ltd., Yokneam, Israel) is a powerful, nonablative, light-based technology that targets melanin and hemoglobin and stimulates the formation of collagen and elastin. Botulinum toxin type A (BTX-A; BOTOX; Allergan Inc., Irvine, CA) treatment of the lateral periocular region relaxes the vertical fibers of the orbicularis oculi and results in softening of the lateral orbital crow's feet rhytides and widening of the palpebral aperture.
To compare the effects of full-face BBL in combination with BTX-A and BBL alone in female subjects with Fitzpatrick I-III skin types, Glogau II-III rhytides, and significant associated facial lentigines and telangiectasia.
This was a prospective, randomized study of 30 women with moderate to severe crow's feet rhytides. Half of the subjects were treated with BTX-A and BBL and the other half with BBL alone. Their response was assessed clinically and photographically. Skin biopsies of the temporal skin were taken from two subjects in each group and were stained with Masson trichrome.
Patients treated with a combination of BTX-A and BBL experienced a better response to treatment, both at rest and on maximum smile, as well as a slightly improved response in associated lentigines, telangiectasia, pore size, and facial skin texture compared with patients who received BBL treatment alone. Skin biopsies showed an increase in dermal collagen in each group.
The patients in this study benefited from both treatments. Although BBL led to a remarkable improvement in full-face telangiectasias, lentigines, and skin texture, the improvement increased in all categories with combination therapy. In addition, an added improvement in the full-face aesthetic with both BTX-A and BBL therapy combined was obvious. These results suggest that both treatments--although evidently complementary--may also act synergistically to produce optimal clinical effects, revolutionizing the treatment of facial aging.
Randomized Controlled Trial
The role of collagen and elastin in aged skin: an image processing approach.
Non-enzymatic glycation of proteins is a consequence of hyperglycemia in diabetes and correlates with aging. The aim of the study was to investigate age-related changes in the glycation of human aortic elastin in healthy subjects by two approaches: (1) assessment by fluorescence method of formed in vivo advanced glycation end products (AGEs) of elastins, purified from human aortas, obtained from different age groups; (2) in vitro glycation of elastins from different age groups and investigation of their capacity to form early (by colorimetric nitroblue tetrazolium method) and AGEs (fluorescence method). Human insoluble elastins were prepared from macro- and microscopic unaltered regions of thoracic aortas, obtained from 68 accident victims, distributed in 15 age-groups, using the method of Starcher and Galione. Soluble alpha-elastins were obtained by the method of Partridge et al. The direct assessment of Maillard reaction related fluorescence in the age groups showed increase of the fluorescence with age. The 'young' elastin had the highest capacity to form both fructosamine and AGEs under glycation in vitro. The glycation of 'old' elastin did not increase markedly during the incubation. These results are consistent with the interpretation that because of its long biological half-life, elastin is susceptible to the slow process of glycation and the following modifications would contribute to the age-related changes of connective tissue.
We aimed to establish an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for measuring soluble elastin fragments (sELAF) in serum and to reveal its usefulness in diagnosing acute aortic dissection.
Acute aortic dissection is a life-threatening disease of the aorta. However, the diagnosis is still frequently missed, especially at onset. The establishment and clinical availability of simplified laboratory test(s) to help diagnose and screen acute aortic dissection patients is therefore urgently needed. METHODS and
An ELISA to measure sELAF in serum was developed using the newly created double monoclonal antibodies which recognize the different epitopes of human aortic elastin. Twenty-five acute aortic dissection patients, 50 patients with acute myocardial infarction, and 474 healthy individuals were enrolled in the study. The sELAF levels from healthy subjects gradually increased with aging. When the cutoff point for positivity was set at the mean + 3SD above the mean of those in healthy subjects at each age, 16 acute aortic dissection patients (64.0%) were found to be positive, while only one acute myocardial infarction patient was positive (2.0%). Acute aortic dissection patients with either an open or a partially open pseudolumen were found to be 88.9% positive for sELAF, while those with its early closure was 0% positive. The difference in the sELAF levels between acute aortic dissection patients with and without a thrombotic closure of false lumen was significant (60.3 +/- 15.6 vs 135.4 +/- 53.2 ng/ml, p &lt; 0.005).
The sELAF level in serum may be a useful marker for helping both diagnose and screen acute aortic dissection, while also helping distinguish acute aortic dissection from acute myocardial infarction.
Aged, 80 and over
Activation of latent transforming growth factor beta 1 and inhibition of matrix metalloprotease activity by a thrombospondin-like tripeptide linked to elaidic acid.
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UMR 6198 CNRS, IFR-53 "Biomolecules", Faculty of Medicine, University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne, 51 Rue Cognacq Jay, 51095 Reims cedex, France.
Impaired wound healing and skin aging are characterized by neutral protease-mediated destruction of matrix macromolecules associated with disturbance in tissue repair. We synthesized a fatty acyl-peptide derivative at aims to simultaneously activate latent TGF-beta through its peptide domain, KFK, and inhibit MMPs through its lipophilic moiety, elaidic acid. Elaidyl-KFK as well as KFK were shown to activate LAP-TGF-beta both in vitro, using a solid phase assay with immobilized LAP-TGF-beta, and ex vivo using human dermal fibroblasts cultures. In both assays, as much as up to 10% of LAP-TGF-beta added could be recovered as active form. KQK, KQFK as well as their lipopeptide counterparts were inactive. Elaidyl-KFK-mediated LAP-TGF-beta activation led to up-regulation of collagen and TIMP-1 production and down regulation of PMA-induced MMP-1 expression in fibroblasts cultures. Those effects could be suppressed by supplementing cell culture medium with blocking TGF-beta antibody. Elaidyl-KFK inhibited MMP-2, MMP-9, MMP-3, MMP-1, in vitro with IC(50) equal to 1.2, 1.0, 0.24 and 8.9 microM, respectively. Its ex vivo inhibitory capacity, as assessed using skin tissue sections, towards the elastin-degrading capacity of MMP-9 was even more pronounced. At a 1 microM concentration, the lipopeptide decreased by up to 80% enzyme activity. Thus, "Lipospondin," i.e. elaidyl-KFK might be considered as a promising model compound to prevent age-associated dermal alterations.
Cell-matrix interactions in aging: role of receptors and matricryptins.
Extracellular matrix (ECM) has been a central topic in aging research for several years. Cell-matrix interactions extend the interest in this topic both for normal tissue homeostatic regulation as well as for its dysregulation in age-related diseases. A relatively new extension of this ever-increasing field of aging research concerns the recognition of the original biological activities exhibited by proteolytic fragments of matrix macromolecules. A number of such matricryptins were recently identified, some of them endowed with harmful effects for tissue function. Some of the breakdown products exert a positive feedback effect by upregulating the biosynthesis of the original macromolecule synthesis and/or the expression of degrading enzymes. This results in vicious circles which might well be involved in tissue aging. The examples detailed in this review concern fibronectin (FN) and elastin. A number of fibronectin fragments (Fn-fr) were shown to exhibit diverse activities including increasing tissue degradation, inflammation and tumor progression. Elastin degradation products acting as agonists on the elastin-laminin receptor can trigger harmful effects such as up-regulation of proteases and free radical production. Both macromolecules are at the center of autoamplifying vicious circles of potential importance for age-dependent modification of tissue function.
Copyright 2003 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.
Tissue response of defined collagen-elastin scaffolds in young and adult rats with special attention to calcification.
Department of Biochemistry 194, NCMLS, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, P.O. Box 9101, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands.
Collagen-elastin scaffolds may be valuable biomaterials for tissue engineering because they combine tensile strength with elasticity. In this study, the tissue response to and the calcification of these scaffolds were evaluated. In particular, the hypothesis was tested that calcification, a common phenomenon in biomaterials, may be due to microfibrils within the elastic fibre, and that these microfibrils might generate a tissue response. Four scaffolds were subcutaneously implanted, viz. collagen, collagen + pure elastin, collagen+microfibril-containing, and collagen + pulverised elastic ligament (the source for elastin). Explants were evaluated at day 3, 7 and 21. In young Sprague Dawley rats, collagen + ligament calcified substantially, whereas collagen + elastin (with and without microfibrils) calcified less, and collagen did not. Calcification started at elastic fibres. In both Sprague Dawley and Wistar adult rats, however, none of the scaffolds calcified. Mononuclear cell infiltration was prominent in young and adult Sprague Dawley rats. In adult Wistar rats, this infiltration was associated with the presence of microfibrils. Degradation of scaffolds and new matrix formation were related with cellular influx and degree of vascularisation. In conclusion, absence of microfibrils from the elastic fibre does not prevent calcification in young Sprague Dawley rats, but does reduce the tissue response in adult Wistar rats. Cellular response and calcification differs with age and strain and therefore the choice of animal model is of key importance in biomaterial evaluation.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Research Institute Growth and Development (GROW), University of Maastricht, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands.
The progressive increase in uterine blood flow (UBF) during pregnancy is accommodated by morphologic changes in the uterine artery (UA) in a process defined as arterial remodeling. This process is accompanied by changes in cytoskeletal architecture of the arterial smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). Aging reduces flow-induced arterial remodeling. We studied changes in the murine UA during pregnancy and on the effects of aging on the capacity of the UA to remodel in response to pregnancy.
We determined morphologic and cytologic changes in UA from nonpregnant and pregnant mice aged 12 weeks (young) and 40 weeks (old) and correlated them with their reproductive performance.
In young mice, pregnancy induced an early increase in UA wall mass, which preceded lumen widening. These changes were not accompanied by altered densities of elastin and collagen in the ECM of the medial layer. Smooth muscle cell proliferation increased in midpregnancy and was paralleled by a transient decrease in smoothelin and smooth muscle alpha-actin expression. In old mice, these pregnancy-dependent changes in the UA wall were either absent or markedly reduced. Although by day 11 of pregnancy litter size did not differ between both age groups, the number of viable pups in old mice by day 17 of pregnancy and at birth was 25% and 60% less than in young mice.
Outward hypertrophic remodeling of the UA during pregnancy in young mice is characterized by transient phenotypic modulation and proliferation of SMCs and alterations in the composition of the ECM. In contrast, in older mice, UA remodeling is markedly reduced and accompanied with a loss of viable fetuses near term pregnancy.
A trifunctional crosslinking amino acid named cyclopentenosine (CP) was isolated from the hydrolysate of bovine nuchal ligament elastin. CP and its derivatives were identified by spectroscopic methods. CP was found to consist of a 2-cyclopenten-1-one structure and its imine-enamine tautomers with enantiomers in H(2)O. A model reaction for the formation of the CP crosslink using model compounds for allysine (propanal) and lysine (n-butylamine) demonstrated that CP is composed of 2-cyclopenten-1-one and alpha, beta, gamma, delta-unsaturated aldehyde derived from three allysine residues. An ion-paired high-performance liquid chromatographic method for the determination of CP was developed. Among various bovine tissues the nuchal ligament had the highest concentration of CP. The age-related changes in the concentration of CP were examined in the aorta from rat (short-lived species) and bovine (long-lived species). The CP content was very low in the newborn rat but increased markedly with growth. After maturity, the CP content remained nearly the same or slightly decreased. In bovine aorta, the CP content scarcely changed from 7 months to 16 years.
Hernandez MR
The elastic fiber consists of several components: a central core of alpha-elastin and a microfibrillar sheath containing three components: fibrillin, microfibril-associated glycoprotein, and a 35-kD protein with amine oxidase activity. Elastin is a major component of the elastic fibers of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of the lamina cribrosa, and elastic fibers undergo marked changes in primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG). These changes, as demonstrated previously, include loss and fragmentation of elastic fibers at the bottom of the glaucomatous cup and disorganization in the peripheral walls of the cup. The author characterized the changes in elastic fibers with age and in POAG at the ultrastructural level, using colloidal gold immunostaining and anti-human alpha-elastin antibody. In fetal eyes, there was no detectable elastin in the ECM of the lamina cribrosa. In infant eyes, elastin was present in microfibrillar aggregates in the core of the plates. In young adults, thin elastic fibers were present that ran longitudinally in the core of the plates. With age, elastic fibers become thicker, tubular, and surrounded by densely packed collagen fibers. In mild POAG, tubular elastic fibers no longer were identifiable. Fragments of elastic fibers and microfibrillar aggregates stained positively for elastin suggested new synthesis of elastin that was not organized into tubular elastic fibers. In advanced POAG, masses of nonfibrillar elastin-positive material had a spotted appearance. Throughout the cribriform plates, there was a loss of collagen fibers, proliferation of basement membranes, and bundles of elastin-negative microfibrils not associated with collagen or elastic fibers. The progression of marked changes in elastic fibers and the disorganization of the ECM of the lamina cribrosa was associated with the loss of function and continuous remodeling of the optic nerve head in POAG.
Aged, 80 and over
Gene cloning and characterization of a Bacillus vietnamensis metalloprotease.
A Bacillus vietnamensis metalloprotease (BVMP) with high affinity toward collagen was isolated and purified from the culture supernatant of Bacillus vietnamensis 11-4 occurring in Vietnamese fish sauces. The BVMP gene was cloned and its nucleotide and coded amino acid sequences determined. BVMP consists of 547 amino acid residues, with the zinc-binding sites conserved in common metalloproteases. It shares 57% amino acid identity with thermolysin originating from Bacillus thermoproteolyticus. The three-dimensional structure of BVMP was deduced by computer-aided modeling with the use of the known three-dimensional thermolysin structure as a template. Like thermolysin, BVMP cleaved the oxidized insulin B-chain at the peptide bonds involving the N-terminal sides of hydrophobic and aromatic amino acids. BVMP also showed high hydrolytic activity toward gelatin, collagen, casein, and elastin, especially toward the skeletal proteins at increased NaCl concentration. The high activity was found to be due to enhanced affinity to the substrates. Kinetical data on BVMP indicated that the Km values for the hydrolysis of Cbz-GPGGPA as a collagen model decreased as the concentration of added NaCl increased. Some contribution of this enzyme during the aging of fish sauces at high salt concentrations can thus be expected.
J-STAGE, Japan Science and Technology Information Aggregator, Electronic
Age-related modifications of aorta and coronaries in the rabbit: a morphological and morphometrical assessment.
Orlandi A
Aging seems to be related to various vascular diseases, such as dissecting aneurysm and atherosclerosis. The nature of the relationship between aging and these vascular diseases has not been completely clarified. The goal of this study was to investigate, using morphological and morphometrical methods, the age related modifications of the arterial wall in rabbits of three different ages, evaluating separately two different vascular districts and the various aortic segments. Our results confirm that the most relevant age-related structural aortic changes were the increase of thickness, length, volume and diameter of the vessels, together with the development of an intimal thickening. The latter was diffuse in the aorta and focal in coronary vessels and it appears earlier in the aorta than in the coronaries, being absent in the coronaries of young rabbits. In addition, morphological and ultrastructural studies revealed the presence in aged rabbits of some marked intimal storage of a ground substance into intimal thickening of proximal aortic segments. Morphometric studies demonstrated an age-related decrease of aortic cellularity of tunica media and a parallel increase of the content of collagen and glycosaminoglycans, whereas elastin did not vary. The different relationships between cells and interstitial tissue occurring with aging are most probably a phenomenon of adaptation to the changing forces acting on the arterial wall and they might constitute the structural background of the increased arterial susceptibility to various noxae. Finally, the intimal storage of the ground substance, probably related to a functional disturbance of endothelium and or smooth muscle cells, may play an initiating role in atherogenesis.
Age-dependent variations of human PMNL elastase activity as a function of pH, ionic strength and calcium concentration.
Human leukocyte elastase (HLE) has been implicated in the pathomechanism of various diseases, such as emphysema and atherosclerosis. The incidence of these diseases is increasing with aging. Therefore, it can be supposed that the HLE activity is changing with aging according to the well known age-related physiological alterations. Thus, the effects of pH, NaCl and calcium concentrations on HLE activity, separated from polymorphonculear leucocytes (PMNLs) of healthy, young (&lt;35 years) and elderly (&gt;75 years) subjects, were studied by measuring the activity with synthetic substrate and with bovine and human atherosclerotic and non-atherosclerotic aortic elastin. From our results, it may be concluded, that the elastolytic activity of HLE separated from PMNLs of elderly subjects is more sensitive to ionic strength, to pH and to the calcium concentration of the medium, than the HLE activity of young subjects. The elastolytic activity of HLE, of both young and old subjects, increases dramatically on atherosclerotic aortic elastin in the presence of calcium. These findings might explain, at least partly, the increased incidence of atherosclerosis with aging.
FGF-18 is upregulated in the postnatal rat lung and enhances elastogenesis in myofibroblasts.
The fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are key players in fetal lung development, but little is known about their status in postnatal lung. Here, we investigated the expression pattern of FGF-18 transcripts through the perinatal period and evidenced a sevenfold increase after birth that paralleled changes in elastin expression. In vitro, recombinant human (rh)FGF-18 had a mitogenic activity on day 21 fetal rat lung fibroblasts and stimulated its own expression in the latter, whereas FGF-2 inhibited it. At 50 or 100 ng/ml, rhFGF-18 increased the expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA; 2.5-fold), a characteristic marker of myofibroblasts, of tropoelastin (6.5-fold), of lysyl oxidase (2-fold), and of fibulins 1 and 5 (8- and 2.2-fold) in confluent fibroblasts isolated from fetal day 21 lung; similar results were obtained with fibroblasts from day 3 postnatal lungs. Elastin protein expression was also slightly increased in fetal fibroblasts. Lung analysis on day 4 in rat pups that had received rhFGF-18 (3 microg) on days 0 and 1 showed a 1.7-fold increase of tropoelastin transcripts, whereas alpha-SMA transcripts were unchanged. In contrast, rhFGF-2 markedly decreased expression of elastin in vitro and in vivo and of fibulin 5 in vitro. In addition, vitamin A, which is known to enhance alveolar development, elevated FGF-18 and elastin expressions in day 2 lungs, thus advancing the biological increase. We postulate that FGF-18 is involved in postnatal lung development through stimulating myofibroblast proliferation and differentiation.
Influence of maturation and age on mechanical and biochemical parameters of connective tissue of various organs in the rat.
The mechanical and biochemical parameters of connective tissue components of several organs in rats, e.g. skin, tail tendons and aorta, have been compared. Organ samples have been analyzed at various ages allowing investigation of the changes during maturation and senescence. The age dependent changes in the various organs were quite similar. The parameters indicating strength and elasticity, e.g. ultimate load, ultimate strength, ultimate strain, modulus of elasticity and rate of load increase, rose sharply during the maturation process and decreased during senescence. These values correlated with changes in insoluble collagen but not with those in elastin or glycosaminoglycans as shown in earlier experiments. The relevance of mechanical models to explain age-dependent changes as compared to descriptive correlations between mechanical and biochemical data is discussed.
We previously reported that biologically uncommon D-aspartyl residues are present in sun-damaged skin from elderly people, possibly in elastin. Here, we report the kinetics of Asp racemization in model peptides corresponding to elastin sequences from exons 6 and 26. We estimated the activation energy (E) of racemization of Asp residues, the racemization rates (RR) at 37 degrees C and the time (t) required for the D/L ratio of Asp to approximate to 1.0 (D/L ratio of Asp=0.99) at 37 degrees C. For an exon 6 peptide, E=29.0 kcal/mol, RR=2.59 x 10(-2)/yr and t=101.0 yr. For an exon 26A peptide E=26.2 kcal/mol, RR=4.27 x 10(-2)/yr and t=61.3 yr; and for a second exon 26A peptide E=25.7 kcal/mol, RR=5.55 x 10(-2)/yr and t=47.0 yr. These results suggest that racemization of Asp residues in elastin could occur within a human life span. We propose that D-Asp could be a useful molecular indicators of aging.
Harold C Schott Chair of Rheumatic and Immunologic Diseases, Center for Vasculitis Care and Research, Cleveland Clinic Foundation A50, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
Studies of autoimmune diseases have not yet elucidated why certain organs or vessels become the objects of injury while others are spared. This paper will explore the hypothesis that important differences exist in regions of the aorta that determine vulnerability to diseases, such as atherosclerosis, aortitis, giant cell arteritis and Takayasu's disease. The reader is invited to reassess; (1) whether the aorta is indeed a single homogeneous structure, and (2) whether the initial stage of aortitis (and indeed other diseases considered "autoimmune") may be primarily due to acquired alterations of substrate, that influence unique immune profiles, which by themselves may not be pathogenic. Disease susceptibility and patterns are influenced by many factors that are inborn and acquired. Examples include genetic background, gender, ethnicity, aging, prior and concomitant illnesses, habits, diet, toxin and environmental exposures. Studies of vascular diseases must assess how such variables may affect regional differences in endothelial cells, subendothelial matrix, vascular smooth muscle and the response of each to a variety of stimuli.
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
Advanced glycation end product (AGE) formation that occurs with aging and diabetes leads to the cross-linking of proteins and subsequent changes in the physicochemical properties of tissues. Cellular responses to AGE that lead to either pathological conditions or removal of AGE are mediated by a number of receptors that have been identified on various cell types such as macrophages, endothelial cells, and smooth-muscle cells. Mechanisms by which AGE affect the cardiovascular system include AGE cross-linking of long-lived proteins such as collagen and elastin and altered cellular responses. Alagebrium (3-phenacyl-4,5-dimethylthiazolium chloride, ALT-711) is the first drug in a new class of thiazolium therapeutic agents that break established AGE cross-links between proteins. In animal studies, alagebrium was effective in reducing large artery stiffness, slowing pulse-wave velocity, enhancing cardiac output, and improving left ventricular diastolic distensibility. In human studies to determine safety and efficacy, alagebrium was safe and well tolerated. In the first phase 2 clinical study, alagebrium improved arterial compliance in elderly patients with vascular stiffening. In two subsequent phase 2 clinical studies, one addressing diastolic heart failure and the other addressing systolic hypertension, alagebrium was effective in improving cardiac function and uncontrolled systolic blood pressure, particularly in more severely affected patients. Additional clinical studies to determine the utility of alagebrium in treating cardiovascular disorders associated with aging are in progress.
Relation between outer and luminal diameter in cannulated arteries.
Resistance in blood vessels is directly related to the inner (luminal) diameter (ID). However, ID can be difficult to measure during physiological experiments because of poor transillumination of thick-walled or tightly constricted vessels. We investigated whether the wall cross-sectional area (WCSA) in cannulated arteries is nearly constant, allowing IDs to be calculated from outer diameters (OD) using a single determination of WCSA. With the use of image analysis, OD and ID were directly measured using either transillumination or a fluorescent marker in the lumen. IDs from a variety of vessel types were calculated from WCSA at several reference pressures. Calculated IDs at all of the reference WCSA were within 5% (mean &lt;1%) of the corresponding measured IDs in all vessel types studied, including vessels from heterozygote elastin knockout animals. This was true over a wide range of transmural pressures, during treatment with agonists, and before and after treatment with KCN. In conclusion, WCSA remains virtually constant in cannulated vessels, allowing accurate determination of ID from OD measurement under a variety of experimental conditions.
Comparative immunocytochemical localization of lysyl oxidase (LOX) and the lysyl oxidase-like (LOXL) proteins: changes in the expression of LOXL during development and growth of mouse tissues.
Lysyl oxidase (LOX) and lysyl oxidase-like (LOXL) are extracellular enzymes that deaminate peptidyl lysyl residues involved in the cross-linking of fibrillar collagens and elastin. While LOX is required for the survival of newborn mice, the role of LOXL during development remains unclear. Studies have shown that the same cell types express LOX and LOXL in the same tissues, but no functional differences have been established. We have compared the immunohistochemical localization of LOX and LOXL in various tissues from normal, young adult mice. LOX and LOXL were co-localized in the skin, aorta, heart, lung, liver and cartilage, but were localized to different areas in the kidney, stomach, small intestine, colon, retina, ovary, testis and brain. LOXL expression was further examined in tissues from different developmental stages. In embryonic mice (10.5-14.5 dpc), LOXL immunostaining was abundant in the heart, liver, intestine, and neural tube. LOXL was present in most major organs in late fetal (16.5 dpc) and newborn mice, but generally diminished as animals aged. Immunoreactivity was significantly reduced in the heart, lung, kidney and liver of 2 year-old mice, but remained prevalent in the skin and tongue. LOX and LOXL were also found in the nuclei of cells in a number of tissues. These results indicate that LOXL has a role during mouse development and in the maintenance of adult tissues.
Hairless (SKH-1) mice were mated with Beige (C57B/bb) mice to produce a hairless mouse deficient in neutrophil elastase (hhbb). These mice were exposed to 0.09J UVB irradiation for 5 months to see if neutrophil elastase was an important factor in elastin remodeling and development of solar elastoses. Analysis of peritoneal neutrophils confirmed that the hhbb mouse was deficient in elastase, retaining only 10% as much activity as the normal littermates (hhHb). Skin MPO activity was equally elevated in all the mice receiving UVB suggesting an equal influx of inflammatory cells. The absolute breaking strength of the skin in both the hhBb and hhbb mice was not altered by UVB treatment over the 5 month exposure period. Elastin quantitated biochemically as desmosine, or visualized histologically, was increased following UVB exposure in the normal mice. In the elastase deficient mice, however, the elastin fibers appeared to be unaffected by exposure to UVB irradiation at this level. The results suggest that neutrophil elastase is an important mediator in the development of solar elastosis resulting from continued exposure to UVB irradiation.
Decreased thickness and integrity of the macular elastic layer of Bruch's membrane correspond to the distribution of lesions associated with age-related macular degeneration.
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Center for Macular Degeneration, The University of Iowa, 11190E PFP, 200 Hawkins Dr., Iowa City, IA 52240, USA.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of blindness in the elderly. In its severest form, choroidal neovessels breach the macular Bruch's membrane, an extracellular matrix compartment comprised of elastin and collagen laminae, and grow into the retina. We sought to determine whether structural properties of the elastic lamina (EL) correspond to the region of the macula that is predilected toward degeneration in AMD. Morphometric assessment of the macular and extramacular regions of 121 human donor eyes, with and without AMD, revealed a statistically significant difference in both the integrity (P &lt; 0.0001) and thickness (P &lt; 0.0001) of the EL between the macular and extramacular regions in donors of all ages. The EL was three to six times thinner and two to five times less abundant in the macula than in the periphery. The integrity of the macular EL was significantly lower in donors with early-stage AMD (P = 0.028), active choroidal neovascularization (P = 0.020), and disciform scars (P = 0.003), as compared to unaffected, age-matched controls. EL thickness was significantly lower only in individuals with disciform scars (P = 0.008). The largest gaps in macular EL integrity were significantly larger in all categories of AMD (each P &lt; 0.0001), as compared to controls. EL integrity, thickness, and gap length in donors with geographic atrophy did not differ from those of controls. These structural properties of the macular EL correspond spatially to the distribution of macular lesions associated with AMD and may help to explain why the macula is more susceptible to degenerative events that occur in this disease.
Heat modulation of tropoelastin, fibrillin-1, and matrix metalloproteinase-12 in human skin in vivo.
Photoaged skin contains elastotic materials in the upper reticular dermis. This phenomenon is commonly known as solar elastosis. In this study, we investigated the effects of heat on the expression of tropoelastin and fibrillin-1, two main components of elastic fibers, and on matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-12, the most active MMP against elastin, in human skin in vivo. Heat was found to increase tropoelastin mRNA and protein expression in the epidermis and in the dermis. Fibrillin-1 mRNA and protein expression were increased by heat in the epidermis, but were decreased in the dermis. We found that pre-treatment of skin with N-acetyl cysteine or genistein for 24 h prior to heat treatment inhibited the heat-induced expression of tropoelastin, but not of fibrillin-1. These data indicate that reactive oxygen species may play a role in tropoelastin expression by heat, but not in fibrillin-1 expression. We also found that heat treatment increases MMP-12 mRNA and protein expression in human skin. Our results suggest that the abnormal production of tropoelastin and fibrillin by heat in human skin and that their degradation by various MMP, such as MMP-12, may contribute to the accumulation of elastotic material in photoaged skin.
Ultraviolet B irradiation of human skin induces an angiogenic switch that is mediated by upregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor and by downregulation of thrombospondin-1.
We have previously demonstrated that skin-specific overexpression of the endogenous angiogenesis inhibitor thrombospondin (TSP)-1 prevented chronic ultraviolet (UV) B-induced angiogenesis, inflammatory cell infiltration and cutaneous photodamage in mice.
To elucidate the mechanisms by which acute UVB-induced angiogenesis induces dermal damage, and to study the molecular regulation of acute UVB-induced angiogenesis in human skin.
We subjected five healthy volunteers to acute UVB irradiation (2 minimal erythema doses) and performed histological analysis at 48 h after UVB irradiation.
Histology revealed epidermal hyperplasia, infiltration of elastase-producing neutrophils and elastin fibre damage. Immunohistochemistry for CD31 demonstrated pronounced angiogenesis with a significant increase in both vascular density and vessel size, associated with increased endothelial cell proliferation. Whereas constitutive expression of TSP-1 but only weak expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) were detected in normal human epidermis, pronounced downregulation of TSP-1 and upregulation of VEGF were observed in epidermal keratinocytes after acute UVB irradiation. These findings were confirmed by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis after UVB irradiation of cultured HaCaT keratinocytes in vitro.
Together, these data indicate that a disruption of the balance between VEGF and TSP-1 expression leads to a UVB-induced angiogenic switch, facilitating the infiltration of elastase-producing leucocytes and cutaneous photodamage.
[Effect of glucose concentration on vascular function in aging. Action on calcium fluxes and vasomotricity induced by elastin peptides].
Glycemia is a physiological parameter tightly regulated for an optimal energetic supply to the organism, in spite of variable tissular glucose needs. Physiopathological alteration of glycemic regulation leads to dysfunctions of many cell types. For example, diabetes considerably increases morbidity and mortality linked to cardiovascular pathologies and constitute nowadays a serious public health problem. Many in vivo and in vitro studies have investigated the impact of extracellular glucose concentration on smooth muscle and endothelial cells. Glycemia regulates expression and activity of proteins implicated in various processes, such as vasodilation (eNOS), cellular adherence (ICAM-1, VCAM-1), glucose transport (GLUT-1) or free radical generation. Nuclear receptors of the PPAR (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors) family which are implicated in glucose and lipid metabolism control, seem to have direct vascular actions, in the regulation of cellular functions by extracellular glucose, reinforcing their status of pharmacological targets for preservation and improvement of vascular function. More general processes, such as cellular proliferation and cell death, are also influenced by glucose concentration. Concerning the contractile function, hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia modulate vascular reactivity while acting on the vasoactive substances level and the cellular response to these molecules. In particular they act on variation of ionic channels (K+, Ca2+) activity or by interfering with some signaling pathways (NO). For example, the age-dependant vasodilation and endothelial calcium influx induced by elastin peptide are modulated by extracellular glucose levels. In conclusion, abnormal chronic variations of circulating glucose levels seem to be directly responsible for endothelial and smooth muscle cell dysfunction in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular abnormalities of patients presenting glycemia dysregulations.
Aging is not a disease. Age changes occur in every adult animal. They take place in all species. Yet, malignant tumours and neurodegenerative diseases grow with age. Nobody dies from aging. Death results from age-associated diseases. Muscular and digestive atrophies rise with age. But should it be said that digestive atrophy leads to malnutrition, or is it the contrary? Where is the chicken and where is the egg? We are enclosed in a vicious circle. A vicious circle is not a simple cycle. It is an irreversible phenomenon that happens when a system of objects is acting on itself. Vicious circles now reach the molecular level. This paper tries to show that the destruction of elastin and of fibronectin in connective tissues produces a self destruction effect. Von Neumann showed that a model of self reproduction with the help of reproductive automata could be imagined. We attempt now to show that nature has imagined a model to produce self destruction, trough degradation products of fibronectin and of elastin. This self destruction process is neither purely stochastic, nor genetically programmed. It is an epigenetical process. It is not present in the beginning, as an a priori instruction, it emerges. We try to give here a unusual specific philosophical definition of the word "emergence".
Enalapril suppresses normal accumulation of elastin and collagen in cardiovascular tissues of growing rats.
We have investigated the effect of enalapril, an angiotensin converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, on the accumulation of ventricular and vascular collagen and elastin in young, growing rats. Beginning at either 4 or 10 wk of age, male Wistar rats were treated with enalapril for 2 or 5 wk. Enalapril treatment had no significant effect on body weight and small, generally non-significant effects on systolic and diastolic blood pressures. In contrast, young enalapril-treated animals showed a marked decrease in accumulation of total elastin and collagen in both large (aorta, renal, and carotid) and smaller (superior and large mesenteric) arteries, as well as a large reduction in total collagen in both left and right ventricles. This effect also was present but less pronounced in rats treated with enalapril beginning at 10 wk of age. These data indicate that inhibition of ACE activity during a period of rapid growth significantly reduces accumulation of vascular and ventricular connective tissue and suggests that angiotensin II may be important in normal cardiovascular development and growth.
Aortic pulse wave velocity (PWV) and augmentation index are independent predictors of adverse cardiovascular events, including mortality. In hypertension and aging, central elastic arteries become stiffer, diastolic pressure decreases, and central systolic and pulse pressures are augmented due to increased PWV and early return of reflected waves to the heart from the periphery. Valuable information on arterial properties such as stiffness can be obtained from both central (aortic) and peripheral (radial artery) pressure waveforms, but absolute values of wave reflection amplitude and wasted left ventricular (LV) pressure energy can only be obtained from the central arterial pressure waveform. As the arterial system becomes stiffer, there is a marked increase in central systolic and pulse pressures and wasted LV energy, along with a decrease in pulse pressure amplification. The increase in aortic systolic and pulse pressures are due primarily to increases in PWV and wave reflection amplitude with a small increase in incident wave amplitude. In individuals with very stiff elastic arteries (eg, in older persons with isolated systolic hypertension), there is a decrease in diastolic pressure. These changes in pressure components increase LV afterload and myocardial oxygen demand and therefore cause an undesirable mismatch between ventricle emptying and arterial pulse wave transmission, which promotes ventricular hypertrophy. High systolic and pulse pressures resulting from advanced age or hypertension increase circumferential arterial wall stress, which likely causes breakdown of medial elastin and increases the possibility of local fatigue, endothelial damage and development of atherosclerosis. Vasodilator drugs may have little direct effect on large central elastic arteries, but at the same time, their effects on peripheral muscular arteries reduce wave reflection amplitude and markedly lower systolic and pulse pressures and ventricular afterload. These beneficial effects on central arterial pressure can occur with or without a reduction in cuff blood pressure (BP) and may explain the apparent "pressure-independent" effects of drugs such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers. Therefore, optimal treatment of high BP and its complications should include consideration of arterial stiffness, augmentation of aortic pressure, and LV wasted energy, all of which should be reduced to the lowest possible level.
The content of dityrosine in chick and rabbit aorta proteins.
The possible presence of dityrosine in elastin derived by two different methods and in structural glycoproteins from aortas of 1 day old chicks, adult rabbits and fetal rabbits was determined by a sensitive spectrofluorimetric procedure. Only chick tissues were found to contain dityrosine, 0.3 residues/100,000 total amino acid residues in aortic elastin and 12-15 residues/100,000 residues in the structural glycoproteins. No dityrosine could be detected in any of the fetal or mature rabbit tissues. However, related fluorescent compounds with different excitation-emission maxima and different elution times were obtained by ion exchange chromatography of structural glycoproteins partially hydrolyzed under alkaline conditions.
Recent work has explored the potential deleterious role that nitric oxide (NO) and its derivatives may have in human disease. The many by-products of NO include nitrite ion, which accumulates in the anterior chamber during ocular inflammation and can be derived from cigarette smoking. Cigarette smoking has been strongly linked to nuclear cataract formation, although the mechanism remains unknown. We have previously observed that nitrite reactions with the matrix proteins elastin and collagen produce damaging effects that mimic those observed in age- and smoking-related illnesses. In the present study we report on the reaction of nitrite with alpha crystallin, the major lens matrix protein. Incubations at neutral pH and body temperature of nitrite with alpha crystallin resulted in protein modifications indicative of oxidative damage and similar to changes seen in the aging lens as well as cataracts. These include increased fluorescence, yellowing and protein cross-linking. L-kynurenine, a tryptophan derivative, was identified as a reaction product. L-kynurenine was also formed from the reaction of nitrite with free tryptophan. Thus, this non-enzymatic nitration of alpha crystallin provides a novel mechanism by which lens proteins may be damaged in vivo. Since human exposure to nitrite is increased by cigarette smoking, this reaction could provide an explanation for the association between nuclear cataracts and smoking.
The degradation of elastin, the insoluble biopolymer of tropoelastin, can lead to the production of small peptides. These elastin-derived peptides (EDPs) are playing a key role in cellular behavior within the extracellular matrix, showing a great variety of biological effects such as chemotaxis, stimulation of cell proliferation, ion flux modifications, vasorelaxation, and inflammatory enzymes secretion. It has also been demonstrated recently that EDPs containing the GXXPG motif could induce pro-MMP1 and pro-MMP3 upregulation. Elastolysis could then cause collagen degradation and play an important role in the aging process. Many experimental studies have been devoted to EDPs, but their structure/activity relationships are not well elucidated yet. However, the assumption that their active conformation is a type VIII beta-turn on GXXP was highly suggested on the basis of predictive statistical calculations. Investigation of the EDPs three-dimensional (3D) structure would provide useful information for drug-design strategies to propose specific inhibitors. The work presented here reports theoretical results obtained from molecular dynamics simulations performed over 128 human EDPs containing the GXXP motif. We show that all the peptides, for which the central residues are not glycines, adopt a canonical (or very close to) type VIII beta-turn structure on the GXXP sequence. Amino acids surrounding this motif are also important for the structural behavior. Any residue located before the GXXP motif (XGXXP) increases the beta-turn stabilization, whereas the residue located after GXXP (GXXPX) has no significant structural effect. Moreover, we show their biological activity can be correlated with their ability to exhibit a type VIII beta-turn conformation.
Fibrillin microfibrils are widely distributed extracellular matrix assemblies that endow elastic and nonelastic connective tissues with long-range elasticity. They direct tropoelastin deposition during elastic fibrillogenesis and form an outer mantle for mature elastic fibers. Microfibril arrays are also abundant in dynamic tissues that do not express elastin, such as the ciliary zonules of the eye. Mutations in fibrillin-1-the principal structural component of microfibrils-cause Marfan syndrome, a heritable disease with severe aortic, ocular, and skeletal defects. Isolated fibrillin-rich microfibrils have a complex 56 nm "beads-on-a-string" appearance; the molecular basis of their assembly and elastic properties, and their role in higher-order elastic fiber formation, remain incompletely understood.
Experimental studies of the elastic fiber of the capsular ligament: influence of ageing and sex hormones on the hip joint capsule of rats.
We have previously developed a method for estimating elastin content and organization in resistance arteries, where it is a minor component. The aim of the present study was to validate the method against a quantitative assay and to determine the relative importance of elastin content and organization for intrinsic elasticity of small arteries. Mesenteric third order branches (from 10-day-old, 1- and 6-month-old rats) and middle cerebral arteries (from 6-month-old rats) were pressurized. beta-Values were calculated from stress-strain relationships and used as indicators of intrinsic stiffness. The same pressure-fixed arteries were used to estimate elastin content and organization in the internal elastic lamina with confocal microscopy. Collagen and elastin contents were determined by Picrosirius Red staining and radioimmunoassay for desmosine, respectively. Confocal and desmosine assays gave similar results: no difference in elastin content of mesenteric vessels from 1- and 6-month-old rats, and a significant reduction in cerebral compared to mesenteric arteries. For all parameters (elastin and collagen content, fenestrae area and internal elastic lamina thickness) the best correlation was found between beta-values and fenestrae size. These data suggest that in small arteries: (1) confocal microscopy can be used as a method for the simultaneous study of changes in elastin content and organization; and (2) elastin organization might be a key determinant of intrinsic elastic properties.
[Helioderma, heliophiles and heliophobes].
The cumulative effect of lifelong sun exposures induces skin alterations which are coined helioderma. The manifestations of helioderma vary according to the body site. This is particularly the case for the prominent differences in the expression of solar elastosis. This condition is commonly more severe on the face and nape of the neck than on the forearms and back of the hands. The age, phototype and behaviour regarding sun exposure are cofactors responsible for the severity of solar elastosis.
Vascular development, pulse pressure, and the mechanisms of hypertension.
For a given cardiac function, the cyclic blood pressure (BP) curve results from 2 different phenotypes: the mean arterial pressure (MAP), a steady component reflecting the resistance of the microvascular network, and pulse pressure (PP), another component corresponding to large artery stiffness and wave reflections. Around birth, cardiovascular (CV) survival is critically influenced by the coupling between the heart and thoracic aorta, and hence, the adequacy of the Windkessel function, the magnitude of aortic elastin accumulation and the PP level. The maturation of the aortic trunk and its branches results from adaptative mechanisms involving shear and tensile stress, with major potential consequences on heart rate control, transit of wave reflections, and coronary perfusion. An adequate optimization of the Windkessel function, and hence PP, diastolic coronary perfusion and CV survival needs a critical MAP level to be reached in each individual during the postnatal period. The achievement of this MAP level requires the development of multiple resistance segments of the microvascular network, particularly within the kidney. Translated in adult populations, this pathophysiological process gives rise to a Gaussian BP distribution, with individuals remaining in the same BP percentile from birth onward (BP tracking). We suggest that hypertension results from early developmental vascular mechanisms that direct BP toward the higher percentiles of the Gaussian distribution curve.
To investigate the effects of topically applied 17beta-estradiol on the expression of extracellular matrix proteins in aged human skin, 17beta-estradiol (0.01%) and its vehicle (70% propylene glycol, 30% ethanol) were applied to aged (68-82 y, eight females and five males) human buttock skin under occlusion for 2 wk (three times per week). Topical 17beta-estradiol was found to increase the expression of type 1 procollagen mRNA and protein significantly in human aged skin in vivo. In addition, metalloproteinase (MMP-1 protein levels were reduced by topical 17beta-estradiol. The expressions of TGF-beta1, TGF-beta type II receptor, and Sma and Mad related (Smad)3 were increased by topical 17 beta-estradiol in aged human skin, and TGF-beta1 neutralizing antibody inhibited 17beta-estradiol-induced procollagen synthesis in cultured fibroblasts. We also found that the expressions of tropoelastin and fibrillin-1 mRNA and protein, and elastic fibers in aged skin were also increased by topical 17beta-estradiol. Topical 17beta-estradiol also increased keratinocyte proliferation and the epidermal thickness in aged human skin. We also observed the same effects of topical 17beta-estradiol in young skin. In conclusion, our results suggest that topical 17beta-estradiol treatment may improve the cutaneous function of aged human skin by improving the connective tissue and increasing epidermal thickness.
Aged, 80 and over
Quantitative analysis for soluble elastin in circulation and cell culture fluids using monoclonal antibody-based sandwich immunoassay.
We have newly established 3 distinct murine monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) against human soluble elastin by using chemically denatured immunogen isolated from human aorta; they are designated as HASG-2, HASG-30, and HASG-61-1. All of these MoAbs were highly reactive with soluble forms of native elastin in normal human serum. HASG-2 and HASG-61-1 MoAbs can recognize soluble bovine elastin as well as human antigen, but HASG-30 cannot. The sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for human soluble elastin was developed with HASG-61-1 labeled with peroxidase and HASG-30 immobilized on the microplates. The circulating levels of soluble elastin in human healthy subjects (mean +/- SD; 42.9 +/- 19.9ng/mL; n = 85) could be measured with full accuracy and reproducibility, and gradually increased with aging. The positive correlation between the levels and ages was statistically significant (r = 0.581, p &lt; 0.0001). In addition, we could also determine the concentration of tropoelastin secreted from cultured human dermal fibroblasts accurately by this ELISA. This simple assay can be utilized for the routine clinical laboratory screening of patients with arteriosclerotic vascular diseases or to accurately determine the concentrations of tropoelastin secreted from cultured human cells.
To investigate the mechanism of age-related change in lung elastic recoil, golden syrian hamsters were divided into three age groups (11-wk group, n = 20; 24-wk group, n = 25; 60-wk group, n = 15). Pressure-volume curves in isolated lungs, length-tension properties of alveolar wall, surface tensions by modified Wilhelmy balance, and collagen and elastin concentrations in the lung tissue were measured. Light and electron micrographs and morphometry were studied. Age-related change was not observed in lung elastic recoil in hamsters. However, old hamsters significantly increased a mean linear intercept and the elasticity constant of alveolar wall. On one hand, a surface tension was increased in old hamsters, associating with the decrease in the number of lamellar body of alveolar type 2 cells. These findings suggested that the reduction in lung elastic recoil which should be caused by both the increase in air space and the decrease in extensibility of alveolar wall would be compensated by the increase in surface tension in old hamsters, which may account for the no age-related change in elastic recoil in hamster lungs.
Cell-elastin interaction and signaling.
Matrix biology expanded its sphere of interest over the recent decades from its original rheological-morphological functions to incorporate control of cell phenotype during development and maturation. Aging and age-related pathologies are accompanied by matrix remodeling, loss of phenotypic traits as during atherogenesis or tumor growth. Most of these recently discovered functions are related to signaling by matrix components to cells through cell-membrane receptors. Some of the signaling molecules are produced by proteolytic degradation of macromolecules of the extracellular matrix. Such peptides (matrikins or matricryptins) exhibit biological functions absent in the native molecule from which these peptides were derived. Some of these novel activities are potentially harmful and appear to be involved in the age-dependent alterations of tissue structure and functions as well as in related pathologies.
Biomechanical and histologic observations of vocal fold fibrous proteins.
National Center for Voice and Speech, Department of Surgery, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84113, USA.
This article discusses the molecular composition of the vocal fold and the relationship of fibrous molecules to the biomechanical and physiological performance of the tissue. The components of the extracellular matrix may be divided into fibrous proteins and interstitial proteins. The fibrous proteins, consisting of collagens and elastins, are the focus of this report. Elastin concentration varies by tissue depth in the vocal folds. Variation of elastin by age is reported, but some controversy exists. The biomechanical terms of stress and strain (and stress-strain curves of human vocal folds) are related to the fibrous proteins of the vocal folds. The fibrous proteins, their role in stress, and their effect on the dynamic range of vocal pitch are presented.
The degradation products of one of the major component of vascular wall, elastin, have several important biological activities. Elastin peptides (KE) are mostly generated during vascular aging and the atherosclerotic process. They induce free radical and proteases production from cells, which are the major components of the atherosclerotic process. In the present study, we investigated whether the interaction between elastin peptides and neutrophils as well as monocytes contributes to low density lipoproteins (LDL) oxidation, being one of the most important initiator of the chronic inflammatory process contributing to the development of atherosclerosis. Here, we present data on the link between the elastin degradation products and LDL oxidation by the chemotactically attracted neutrophils and monocytes. The KE as well as the active epitope, the hexapeptide VGVAPG is able, in a differential concentration and time dependence, to induce the oxidation of LDL. KE is able to induce via the production of free radicals by neutrophils the oxidation of LDL very rapidly and in higher concentration compared to monocytes. These effects of KE are occurring through the stimulation of the 67 kDa elastin-laminin receptor (ELR), as demonstrated by the uncoupling effect of lactose. In our present study, the HDL was able to decrease the LDL oxidation by KE. This is a new mechanism by which elastin peptides might participate in the initiation and progression of the atherosclerotic process.
Cand F
Sepsis is a potentially life-threatening medical condition induced by viral, bacterial or fungal infection, which is characterized by systemic inflammation, hypotension and vasodilation that can lead to cardiovascular collapse. Increased activity of elastases, enzymes which degrade the extracellular matrix components including elastin, has been demonstrated in plasma of septic patients. Since elastin peptides (EP), by binding to an elastin-laminin receptor on vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells, induce dose-dependent vasodilation, we hypothesized that elevated circulating EP could contribute to the vasodilation that occurs in septic patients.
Blood for measurement of EP was collected from not-septic and septic patients admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), as well as from healthy subjects. Plasma EP concentrations were measured using a competitive ELISA technique.
The plasma EP level in the septic patients was approximately half that of the not-septic patients and the healthy controls, with similar EP levels in the latter two groups. There was no apparent association between EP levels and age or gender in any of the groups.
Plasma EP levels were actually decreased in septic patients, possibly indicating that the balance between EP production vs. elimination favors elimination. This result further suggests that circulating EP may not be important in the development of the vasodilation and hypotension that occurs in septic shock. Alternatively, however, increased degradation of EP by elastase or other enzymes could lead to the appearance of biologically active EP, which may not be recognized by the ELISA assay.
Aged, 80 and over
Lysyl oxidase in development, aging and pathologies of the skin.
Lysyl oxidase (LOX) is a copper- and lysyl-tyrosyl cofactor containing amine oxidase that has been known to play a critical role in the catalysis of lysine-derived crosslinks in extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in the dermis. Changes in the composition and crosslinked state of the ECM and alterations in LOX synthesis and activity are known to be associated with aging and a range of acquired and heritable skin disorders. It has been assumed until recently that the LOX-related changes in the skin are mediated through the catalytic activity of LOX. However, work by several laboratories over the last few years has shown that LOX is a multifunctional protein. In this review we discuss the regulation of expression, localization and activation of LOX in the normal developing and adult skin, and alterations in LOX expression and activity associated with skin aging and senescence, and in pathological conditions, including wound healing, fibrosis, hypertrophic scarring, keloids, scleroderma, and diabetic skin. We further evaluate the role of LOX in skin ECM changes associated with the normal aging process and with these pathological states. In addition to collagen and elastin cross-linkages, regulatory and activation mechanisms and cell type specific LOX interactions may contribute to a range of novel intra- and extracellular LOX functions that appear critical determinants of the cellular microenvironment in the normal skin and in these skin disorders.
Estrogens and the skin.
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of Malta Medical School, St. Luke's Hospial, Guardamangia, Malta.
A review of the medical literature concerning the effect of the menopause and its hormonal treatment on the skin.
An extensive Medline and Pubmed internet search utilizing the key words: collagen, elastin, estrogen, hormone replacement therapy, skin and aging.
The literature review demonstrated a wide array of research ranging from basic science work to clinical implications of the effects of the menopause and its treatment on the skin.
Estrogen loss at menopause has a profound influence on skin. Estrogen treatment in postmenopausal women has been repeatedly shown to increase collagen content, dermal thickness and elasticity, and data on the effect of estrogen on skin water content are also promising. Further, physiologic studies on estrogen and wound healing suggest that hormone replacement therapy (HRT) may play a beneficial role in cutaneous injury repair. Results on the effect of HRT on other physiologic characteristics of skin, such as elastin content, sebaceous secretions, wrinkling and blood flow, are discordant. Given the responsiveness of skin to estrogen, the effects of HRT on aging skin require further examination, and careful molecular studies will likely clarify estrogen's effects at the cellular level.
The incidence of abdominal aortic aneurysm has recently increased. There is still no accurate definition of abdominal aortic aneurysm. The diameter of abdominal aortic aneurysms is the only factor permitting evaluation of the risk of rupture of aneurysms whose growth remains unpredictable. Abdominal aortic aneurysm is a multi-factorial disease associated with aortic aging and atheroma. It differs from stenotic disease by the intensity of degenerative or destructive phenomena in the media. Particular hemodynamic conditions in the infrarenal abdominal aorta seem to enhance the development of aneurysm at this level. While certain constitutional anomalies of the extracellular matrix of proteins seem to enhance the development of abdominal aortic aneurysm, protease activity of as yet undetermined origin also seems to play a prominent role. Family cases of abdominal aortic aneurysms have been reported but the mechanisms responsible remain to be determined. Several genetic markers have been suggested. The most reliable marker of aortic aneurysm is arteriomegaly.
Fibulin-5 deposition in human skin: decrease with ageing and ultraviolet B exposure and increase in solar elastosis.
Fibulin-5 was recently found as a secreted extracellular matrix protein that functions as a scaffold for elastic fibres. However, the distribution of fibulin-5 in human skin and its changes during the ageing process are not known.
To explore the involvement of fibulin-5 in skin ageing, the age-dependent changes in fibulin-5 localization in human skin were examined compared with those of other elastic fibre components including elastin, fibrillin-1 and fibulin-2. Methods The distribution of elastin, fibrillin-1, fibrillin-2, fibulin-2 and fibulin-5 was investigated by means of immunohistochemistry using their specific antibodies. Skin samples were recovered from 12 healthy subjects undergoing plastic surgery. Ultraviolet (UV) B-irradiated or control nonirradiated buttock skin samples were obtained from two healthy volunteers at 2 days after the irradiation at 2 minimal erythemal doses.
In the reticular dermis of young sun-protected skin from the upper arm, fibulin-5 colocalized with the other elastic fibre components, while in the papillary dermis fibulin-5 showed candelabra-like structures perpendicular to the epidermis with an unstained area just beneath the epidermis, which was similar to that of elastin but not fibrillin-1. Fibulin-5 in the reticular dermis decreased and disappeared with age even in sun-protected skin from the thigh, abdomen and upper arm. In sun-exposed skin, fibulin-5 was extremely reduced in the dermis of cheek skin even from a 20-year-old man. UVB irradiation reduced fibulin-5, fibulin-2 and elastin markedly, moderately and weakly, respectively, compared with levels in control nontreated skin. Interestingly, the deposition of fibulin-5 was increased in solar elastosis, like that of other elastic fibre components.
These results suggest that fibulin-5 is a good marker of skin ageing and that the earlier loss of fibulin-5 may involve age-dependent changes in other elastic fibre components.
Laser and Retinal Research Unit, King's College Hospital, University of London, Denmark Hill, London SE5 9RS, UK. senswathi@aol.com
Fifty-six patients with AMD were classified into two groups: early age-related maculopathy (ARM) and neovascular AMD. The control group consisted of 15 age-matched subjects with no AMD. S-EDP levels in the serum of these subjects was estimated by competitive ELISA, using solubilized alpha-elastin from human aorta and polyclonal antibodies to this antigen.
The cause of this association between S-EDPs and AMD is unknown, but it suggests that systemic elastin degradation may increase the risk of conversion from early ARM to neovascular AMD. Further studies are needed to confirm whether the serum level of S-EDPs is a useful predictor of conversion from early ARM to neovascular AMD.
Aged, 80 and over
Department of Rheumatic and Immunologic Diseases, Center for Vasculitis Care and Research, Cleveland Clinic Foundation A50, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. hoffmag@ccf.org
Studies of autoimmune diseases have not yet elucidated why certain organs or vessels become the objects of injury while others are spared. This paper explores the hypothesis that important differences exist in regions of the aorta; these regional variations determine vulnerability to such diseases as atherosclerosis, aortitis, giant-cell arteritis, and Takayasu's disease. The reader is invited to reassess two issues: (1) whether the aorta is indeed a single homogeneous structure; and (2) whether the initial stage of aortitis (and indeed other diseases considered "autoimmune") may primarily be the result of acquired alterations of substrate that influence unique immune profiles, but that by themselves may not be pathogenic. Disease susceptibility and patterns are influenced by many factors that are either inborn or acquired. Examples include genetic background, gender, ethnicity, aging, prior and concomitant illnesses, habits, diet, and exposure to toxins and other environmental hazards. Studies of vascular diseases must assess how such variables affect regional anatomic differences in endothelial cells, subendothelial matrix, and vascular smooth muscle, as well as the response of each to a variety of stimuli.
The receptor for advanced glycation end products is highly expressed in the skin and upregulated by advanced glycation end products and tumor necrosis factor-alpha.
Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) form non-enzymatically from reactions of proteins with reducing sugars. In the skin, AGEs were reported to accumulate in dermal elastin and collagens and to interact nonspecifically with the cell membrane of dermal fibroblasts. Therefore, AGEs may influence the process of skin aging. We investigated the presence of the AGE receptor RAGE in skin and the influence of AGEs on receptor expression and the formation of extracellular matrix (ECM). Sections of sun-protected and sun-exposed skin were analyzed with monoclonal antibodies against (RAGE), heat-shock protein 47, factor XIIIa, CD31, and CD45. RAGE was mainly expressed in fibroblasts, dendrocytes, and keratinocytes and to a minor extent in endothelial and mononuclear cells. Human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs) highly expressed RAGE on the protein and mRNA level when analyzed by quantitative Western blotting and real-time PCR. Incubation of HFFs with the specific RAGE ligand Nepsilon-(carboxymethyl)lysine-modified BSA (CML-BSA) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha resulted in significant upregulation of RAGE expression. CML-BSA induced a mildly profibrogenic pattern, increasing connective tissue growth factor, transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) 1, and procollagen-alpha1(I) mRNA, whereas expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1, -2, -3, and -12 was unaffected. We conclude that in HFFs, AGE-RAGE interactions may influence the process of skin aging through mild stimulation of ECM gene expression.
Aged, 80 and over
Functional anatomy and physiology of tendons.
Anatomy Department, Trinity College, University of Dublin, Ireland.
Tendons vary in type, shape, and size. The anatomy, histology, and physiology of tendons are described in this article, with particular reference to those tendons that are vulnerable in sports medicine.
Effects of spontaneous hypertension and age on arterial connective tissue in the rat.
Expression of elastin-related proteins and matrix metalloproteinases in actinic elastosis of sun-damaged skin.
Actinic elastosis is characterized by an accumulation of elastotic material in the upper dermis and is considered to be a manifestation of ultraviolet-induced skin aging. To compare the structural components of the elastotic material in actinic elastosis with those in normal skin, skin specimens were stained with antibodies raised against various elastin-related proteins. Elastotic materials exhibited a strong reaction to the antibodies for elastin, microfibril-associated glycoprotein-1 (MAGP-1), MAGP-4, matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1), MMP-2 and MMP-3, but a diminished reaction to anti-MMP-9 antibody. Fibroblast cell lines from the upper dermis of affected and unaffected skin were established, and the mRNA levels of MMPs were determined. MMP-1 and -2 mRNA levels were found to be elevated approximately twofold in the fibroblasts from actinic elastosis. Since MMP-1 and -2 are considered to be major enzymes involved in the degradation of matrix components, the accumulation of elastotic materials in actinic elastosis may be related to the degradation process.
Aged, 80 and over
Facial skin fluorescence as a marker of the skin's response to chronic environmental insults and its dependence on age.
Throughout life facial skin is exposed to a variety of adverse environmental conditions and is constantly required to repair itself. The rate of epidermal cell proliferation is indicative of the skin's repair rate and can be monitored noninvasively in vivo using skin intrinsic fluorescence markers.
The goal of the present study was to assess the effects of ageing, geographical region, ethnic origin and season on the ability of facial skin to repair itself in the presence of chronic environmental insults using in vivo fluorescence spectroscopy.
Skin fluorescence emission was measured on the cheeks of 522 individuals in winter and repeated in summer in five different geographical locations in the Asia-Pacific region. Fluorescence emission was also measured from 80 caucasians of fair complexion in the United States (New Jersey area) on the face and on a relatively protected area (upper inner arm). The age range of the participants was 14-75 years.
We found that epidermal proliferation rates decrease monotonically with age, while the fluorescence of collagen and elastin cross-links increases with age indicating accumulation of advanced glycation end-products. These trends were independent of geographical region, ethnic origin and season of measurement. Epidermal proliferation rates of facial skin were higher than those of unexposed sites; they may be 10 times higher in younger (second decade) than in older (seventh decade) individuals, and they decrease with age at rates 10 times faster compared with those of unexposed sites.
This is the first time that epidermal proliferation and its dependence on ageing have been measured noninvasively on the human face. The higher tryptophan fluorescence values on the face vs. the protected site are indicative of accelerated rates of epidermal proliferation in the presence of chronic environmental insults. The repair potential of facial skin, i.e. its ability to maintain high proliferation rates, is maximal in younger populations and gradually decreases with age.
Collagen and elastin gene expression in aortic aneurysms.
The decreased elastin concentration found in abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) may result from a differential synthetic response wherein elastin gene expression fails to increase in parallel with type I procollagen (COL I) gene expression. The purpose of this study is to determine tissue mRNA levels for elastin and COL I in AAAs compared with levels in normal, age-matched aorta and to determine the relationship between aging and COL I gene expression.
Total RNA exacted from normal infrarenal aortic tissue (n = 7) and AAA (n = 10) tissue was subjected to Northern analysis. Mean values for COL I, elastin, and alpha-tubulin mRNA levels were compared by use of the Student t test. Age and COL I mRNA levels were analyzed by regression analysis.
COL I mRNA was increased significantly in AAAs (1.18 +/- 0.13) compared with normal aortas (0.14 +/- 0.05). A commensurate increase in elastin mRNA (AAAs, 0.11 +/- 0.02, vs normal aortas, 0.39 +/- 0.2) was absent. There was no correlation between age and COL gene expression.
The decreased elastin concentration relative to collagen in AAAs may be explained, in part, by the changes in message level of elastin and collagen. The enhanced COL I gene expression in AAAs is unrelated to age.
We had the opportunity to investigate a new case of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria, a rare disease commonly regarded as a model in the study of aging. Two strains of fibroblasts (strains 1 and 2) were derived from two pieces of a skin biopsy. These two populations multiplied as normal cells at low population doubling level but senesced rapidly and stopped proliferating after 14 or 15 population doubling levels. Interestingly, an unusual pattern of growth in clusters was observed for strain 1. The level of collagen and noncollagen protein synthesis of both strains of affected fibroblasts was similar to that of normal fibroblasts as determined by [3H]proline incorporation measurement and was similarly affected by varying serum concentrations. The pattern of the main types of newly synthesized collagen polypeptides analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was similar in normal and progeria cells. The steady-state level of mRNAs coding for macromolecules of the extracellular matrix did not provide any differences between affected and control fibroblasts except for a strong increase of elastin and of alpha 1 and alpha 2 type IV procollagen mRNA mainly in strain 1 and less marked in strain 2. Interestingly, senescent progeria fibroblasts exhibited a reduced level of all the tested mRNAs, whereas collagen type IV and elastin mRNAs remained elevated. As suggested by immunofluorescence and immunoblotting studies, the increased amount of type IV mRNAs was paralleled by an enhanced production of type IV collagen by fibroblasts in vitro. Histologic examination of the skin revealed a superabundant network of abnormal elastic fibers in the reticular dermis and a thickening of basement membranes. The relationship between these alterations and aging in progeria is discussed.
Targeted disruption of fibulin-4 abolishes elastogenesis and causes perinatal lethality in mice.
Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85711, USA.
Elastic fibers provide tissues with elasticity which is critical to the function of arteries, lungs, skin, and other dynamic organs. Loss of elasticity is a major contributing factor in aging and diseases. However, the mechanism of elastic fiber development and assembly is poorly understood. Here, we show that lack of fibulin-4, an extracellular matrix molecule, abolishes elastogenesis. fibulin-4-/- mice generated by gene targeting exhibited severe lung and vascular defects including emphysema, artery tortuosity, irregularity, aneurysm, rupture, and resulting hemorrhages. All the homozygous mice died perinatally. The earliest abnormality noted was a uniformly narrowing of the descending aorta in fibulin-4-/- embryos at embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5). Aorta tortuosity and irregularity became noticeable at E15.5. Histological analysis demonstrated that fibulin-4-/- mice do not develop intact elastic fibers but contain irregular elastin aggregates. Electron microscopy revealed that the elastin aggregates are highly unusual in that they contain evenly distributed rod-like filaments, in contrast to the amorphous appearance of normal elastic fibers. Desmosine analysis indicated that elastin cross-links in fibulin-4-/- tissues were largely diminished. However, expression of tropoelastin or lysyl oxidase mRNA was unaffected in fibulin-4-/- mice. In addition, fibulin-4 strongly interacts with tropoelastin and colocalizes with elastic fibers in culture. These results demonstrate that fibulin-4 plays an irreplaceable role in elastogenesis.
Aged, 80 and over
All the living molecules appear to suffer from the deleterious effects of aging, but the primary mechanisms of this inexorable evolution are still unknown. In the case of proteins, two major types of chemical reactions participate in the aging phenomena: 1) structural transformations induced by the addition of radicals by enzymic or non-enzymic reactions, 2) proteolytic cleavages. Among the reactions of the first group, the nonenzymatic glycation is the more generalized, not only in diabetic patients but also in non diabetic subjects. This glycation depends on the probabilities of encounters between circulating glucose molecules and free amino groups existing either at the N-terminal end of the polypeptide chains or on the lysyl side chains. These reactions are more frequent in the extracellular spaces and connective tissues because glucose circulates freely in these spaces, because the level of glucose is better controlled inside the cells (and even lower in diabetes mellitus), and finally because the proteins of these regions, such as the collagens, fibronectin and elastin, are relatively long lived, even if their life-span is really shorter than it was precedently believed. The binding of sugar residues to protein amino groups determines frequent modifications of structure that often make the molecule inactive. For instance, when a glucose unit binds to a lysyl radical located in the active center of an enzyme, it suppresses the activity of this enzyme. More generally, in the case of the connective tissue proteins that participate in complex supramolecular assemblies, the presence of additional radicals on some ponctual locations may interfere with the correct association of molecules. This is particularly true for basement membranes whose structure is impaired in diabetes. Glycation might also introduce abnormal cross-links between polypeptides or modify the antigenic power of some proteins and explain the formation of autoantibodies. Another property of glycated proteins is their reaction with oxygen leading to the formation of superoxide. The binding of a reducing sugar on an amino function is followed by an Amadori rearrangement that forms a ketol group. Ketols groups have the property to transmit electrons to molecular oxygen, and to forming superoxide radicals. Superoxide is capable of degrading only one protein: collagen, but it is also able to transform itself into hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals, which are far more toxic than O2-. The result of the formation of these oxygen free radicals from glycated proteins is the initiation of the degradation of several types of proteins, like the collagens.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
Human semilunar cardiac valve remodeling by activated cells from fetus to adult: implications for postnatal adaptation, pathology, and tissue engineering.
Cardiovascular Division, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. eaikawa@partners.org
The evolution of cell phenotypes and matrix architecture in cardiac valves during fetal maturation and postnatal adaptation through senescence remains unexplored.
We hypothesized that valvular interstitial (VIC) and endothelial cell (VEC) phenotypes, critical for maintaining valve function, change throughout life in response to environmental stimuli. We performed quantitative histological assessment of 91 human semilunar valves obtained from fetuses at 14 to 19 and 20 to 39 weeks' gestation; neonates minutes to 30 days old; children aged 2 to 16 years; and adults. A trilaminar architecture appeared by 36 weeks of gestation but remained rudimentary compared with that of adult valves. VECs expressed an activated phenotype throughout fetal development. VIC density, proliferation, and apoptosis were significantly higher in fetal than adult valves. Pulmonary and aortic fetal VICs showed an activated myofibroblast-like phenotype (alpha-actin expression), abundant embryonic myosin, and matrix metalloproteinase-collagenases, which indicates an immature/activated phenotype engaged in matrix remodeling versus a quiescent fibroblast-like phenotype in adults. At birth, the abrupt change from fetal to neonatal circulation was associated with a greater number of alpha-actin-positive VICs in neonatal aortic versus pulmonary valves. Collagen content increased from early to late fetal stages but was subsequently unchanged, whereas elastin significantly increased postnatally. Collagen fiber color analysis revealed a progressive temporal decrease in thin fibers and a corresponding increase in thick fibers. Additionally, collagen fibers were more aligned in adult than fetal valves.
Fetal valves possess a dynamic/adaptive structure and contain cells with an activated/immature phenotype. During postnatal life, activated cells gradually become quiescent, whereas collagen matures, which suggests a progressive, environmentally mediated adaptation.
Ellagic and tannic acids protect newly synthesized elastic fibers from premature enzymatic degradation in dermal fibroblast cultures.
Progressive proteolytic degradation of cutaneous elastic fibers, that cannot be adequately replaced or repaired by adult dermal fibroblasts, constitutes a major feature of aging skin. Our present investigations, employing monolayer cultures of human dermal fibroblasts and organ cultures of skin biopsies, were aimed at testing whether the hydrophilic tannic acid (TA) and lipophilic ellagic acid (EA) would protect dermal elastin from exogenous and endogenous enzymatic degradation. Results from both culture systems indicated that dermal fibroblasts, maintained with TA or EA, deposit significantly more elastic fibers than untreated control cultures despite the fact that neither polyphenol enhanced transcription of elastin mRNA or cellular proliferation. Results of a pulse and chase experiment showed that pretreatment with both polyphenols enhanced biostability of tropoelastin and newly deposited elastin. Results of in vitro assays indicated that both polyphenols bound to purified elastin and significantly decreased its proteolytic degradation by elastolytic enzymes belonging to the serine proteinase, cysteine proteinase, and metallo-proteinase families. Importantly, both polyphenols also synergistically enhanced elastogenesis induced by selected elastogenic compounds in cultures of dermal fibroblasts. We propose that EA and TA may be useful for preventing proteolytic degradation of existing dermal elastic fibers and for enhancing more efficient elastogenesis in aged skin.
Extracellular aging--accumulating molecular damage by glycation, oxidation, and crosslinking of long-lived extracellular proteins, mainly collagen and elastin--is a major cause of several important human aging pathologies. Crosslinking increases mechanical stiffness of blood vessels and urinary bladder. Crosslinking impairs the functioning of the kidney, heart, retina, and other tissues and organs. Glycation adducts trigger inflammatory signaling, provoking tissue damage and cancers. Crosslinking tightens up the extracellular matrix (ECM), hardening it against natural turnover processes. Known crosslink breakers (e.g., alagebrium, of the thiazolium halide family) are only partly effective because they break only a subset of AGE crosslink structures (sugar-derived alpha-diketone bridges). So far, no agent has been found that breaks the prevalent glucosepane and K2P crosslink structures. Enzymes that would be able to recognize and disassemble glycation products may be too big to migrate into the ECM and repair collagen or elastin in vivo. Two approaches to therapy development are presented here. ECM turnover enhancement would enhance natural processes to digest old ECM and replace it with new. It will be important to tune the collagen degradation to a rate slow enough to prevent dire side-effects, such as hemorrhage from leaky blood vessels as collagen molecules are removed and replaced. Glycation breaker discovery would use high-throughput screening and rational drug design to find molecules that are able to break glucosepane crosslinks and K2P crosslinks of extracellular proteins. Candidates would be further screened for selectivity and toxicity in order to avoid damage to other molecules.
Maternal undernutrition reduces aortic wall thickness and elastin content in offspring rats without altering endothelial function.
Epidemiological studies suggest a link between fetal/early infant nutrition and adult coronary artery disease. In the present study, we examined the effects of altering nutrition during gestation, lactation and juvenile life on aortic structure and function in rats. Wistar rat dams were fed either a control or low-protein diet throughout pregnancy, or a low-protein diet for the final 7 days of gestation only. At 21 days post-partum, male pups were weaned on to a control, low-protein or high-fat diet. At 12 weeks, the offspring rats were killed. In 46 rats, aortic sections were mounted and stained to assess media thickness and elastin content. In a further 38 rats, aortic rings were suspended in an organ bath and vascular reactivity was tested with dose-response curves to the endothelium-dependent dilator acetylcholine and the endothelium-independent dilator sodium nitroprusside. Rats exposed to maternal protein restriction while in utero had a significantly decreased aortic wall thickness compared with control rats (P=0.005). Total elastin content of the aorta was also decreased by both maternal low-protein (P=0.02) and early postnatal low-protein (P=0.01) diets. Neither maternal nor postnatal low-protein or high-fat diets, however, resulted in any significant changes in arterial dilator function. In conclusion, fetal undernutrition in rats, induced via a maternal low-protein diet, causes a decrease in aortic wall thickness and elastin content without altering aortic dilator function. These changes in vascular structure may amplify aging-related changes to the vasculature and contribute to the pathophysiology of the putative link between impaired fetal growth and adult cardiovascular disease.
Portland Press
Department of Optometry and Vision Science, Cardiff University, UK.
Fibronectin, elastin, and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) staining were assessed in young and old laminae cribrosae. An age range (7 days to 96 years) of human laminae cribrosae were analysed for lipid content (n=9), cellularity (n=28), total sulphated glycosaminoglycans (n=28), elastin content (n=9), and water content (n=56), using chloroform-methanol extraction, fluorimetry, the dimethylmethylene blue assay, and ion exchange chromatography, respectively.
Qualitatively, an increase in elastin and a decrease in fibronectin and GFAP were demonstrated when young tissue was compared with the elderly. Biochemical analysis of the ageing human lamina cribrosa demonstrated that elastin content increased from 8% to 28% dry tissue weight, total sulphated glycosaminoglycans decreased, and lipid content decreased from 45% to 25%. There were no significant changes in total cellularity or water content.
These alterations in composition may be indicative of the metabolic state of the lamina cribrosa as it ages, and may contribute to changes in mechanical integrity. Such changes may be implicated in the susceptibility of the elderly lamina cribrosa and also its response to glaucomatous optic neuropathy.
Age and skin structure and function, a quantitative approach (II): protein, glycosaminoglycan, water, and lipid content and structure.
The aging process has been studied with fervor recently, given our shifting demographics. As age's effects are so manifest in the skin's appearance, structure, mechanics, and barrier function, it is not surprising that much effort has been made in research to better understand them. Quantitative measurements permitted by bioengineering have allowed us to objectively and precisely study aging skin. These overviews piece together the immense amounts of information that have emerged from recent technological advances in dermatological research in order to develop a unified understanding of the quantitative effects of age on skin.
We performed a literature search on age-related changes in protein, glycosaminoglycan (GAG), water, and lipid content and structure, searching Pub-med, Em-Base, Science Citation Index, and the UCSF dermatological library's collection of books on the topic of aging skin.
Collagen becomes sparser and less soluble in intrinsically aged skin, but is thickened and more soluble in extrinsically aged areas. Elastin is degraded slowly and accumulates damage with intrinsic aging; also, increased synthesis of abnormally structured elastin occurs in photoexposed areas. This leads to an age-related accumulation of aberrant elastoic material, clumped in the papillary dermis. Generally, age leads to increased folding and decreased interaction of proteins with water. Also, despite increased GAGs in aged skin, these are abnormally deposited on the elastoic material and cannot interact properly with water. Hence, in aged skin, water is found in the tetrahedron form, bound to itself rather than other molecules. Lipid content appears to decrease with age, although the proportion of different lipid classes seems to remain fairly constant.
Much work remains to be carried out to reach a consensus on the effects of age on skin structure and function. Future studies would be benefited by increased standardization of skin sites tested, methodology, and increased sample sizes.
Osteoprotegerin inactivation accelerates advanced atherosclerotic lesion progression and calcification in older ApoE-/- mice.
Osteoprotegerin (OPG), a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily of proteins, plays an important role in bone remodeling and is expressed in both mouse and human atherosclerotic lesions. The current study was designed to assess whether OPG plays a role in the progression and calcification of advanced atherosclerotic lesions in apoE(-/-) mice.
Atherosclerotic lesion area and composition and aortic calcium content were examined in mice deficient in both OPG and apolipoprotein E (OPG(-/-).apoE(-/-) mice) at 20, 40, and 60 weeks of age. Littermate OPG(+/+).apoE(-/-) mice were used as controls. The average cross-sectional area of lesions in the innominate arteries was increased in OPG(-/-).apoE(-/-) mice at 40 and 60 weeks of age. The increase in lesion area was coupled with a reduced cellularity and an increase in connective tissue including laminated layers of elastin. Sixty-week-old OPG(-/-).apoE(-/-) mice also had an increase in the area of calcification of the lesions. There were no differences in markers of plaque stability. In vitro, OPG induced matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) activity in macrophages and smooth muscle cells and acted as a survival factor for serum-deprived smooth muscle cells.
OPG inhibits advanced plaque progression by preventing an increase in lesion size and lesion calcification. OPG may act as a survival factor and may modulate MMP9 production in vascular cells.
RANK Ligand
Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/blood
Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/genetics
Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/metabolism*
RANK Ligand
Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear
Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation rapidly increases tyrosine phosphorylation (i.e. activates) of epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) in human skin. EGFR-dependent signaling pathways drive increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases, whose actions fragment collagen and elastin fibers, the primary structural protein components in skin connective tissue. Connective tissue fragmentation, which results from chronic exposure to solar UV irradiation, is a major determinant of premature skin aging (photoaging). UV irradiation generates reactive oxygen species, which readily react with conserved cysteine residues in the active site of protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTP). We report here that EGFR activation by UV irradiation results from oxidative inhibition of receptor type PTP-kappa (RPTP-kappa). RPTP-kappa directly counters intrinsic EGFR tyrosine kinase activity, thereby maintaining EGFR in an inactive state. Reversible, oxidative inactivation of RPTP-kappa activity by UV irradiation shifts the kinase-phosphatase balance in favor of EGFR activation. These data delineate a novel mechanism of EGFR regulation and identify RPTP-kappa as a key molecular target for antioxidant protection against skin aging.
Altered expression of trefoil factor 3 and cathepsin L gene in rat kidney during aging.
Panda H
Alterations in a wide array of physiological functions are normal consequences of aging. It is likely that, decline in cellular and physiological functions that occur during aging are the net result of age related differential gene expression and their consequent down stream effects. In this report we demonstrate that in aged kidney there is a decrease in the expression of trefoil factor 3 gene and an age-related increase in the expression of cathepsin L gene as revealed by differential display PCR (DD-PCR) and northern blot analysis. Trefoil factor 3 is mainly expressed in the alimentary canal and protects it from the degradative effect of HCl by stimulating the goblet cells to synthesize mucin. Though the exact role of trefoil factor 3 in kidney is not known, we speculate that it has a protective role in kidney. Cathepsin L is a cysteine protease which degrades connective tissue proteins like collagen, elastin and fibronectin. Increase in the expression of cathepsin L in aged kidney leading to considerable loss of organ function in old age. Down regulation of trefoil factor 3 and up regulation of cathepsin L may contribute to lack of protection and increased age related tissue damage to kidney in aging.
A comparison of the size of fenestrations in the internal elastic lamina of young and old porcine aortas as seen with the scanning electron microscope.
The size of the fenestrations (windows) in the internal elastic lamina (IEL) of arteries may be important in the functioning of the blood vessel wall. The fenestrations are filled with collagen, muscle, and (or) ground substance, which must be removed to make the fenestration visible with the scanning electron microscope. All of the nonelastic components are removed with a hot alkali solution. Our experiments were designed to compare the fenestration size in the IEL of the thoracic aorta of young (6-8 weeks) and old (6-9 months) pigs. A protocol for digestion of young pig tissue was developed and showed that fresh young aortas should be digested in 0.1 M NaOH at 75 degrees C for 2 h and fixed tissue should be digested for 5 h. The average area of the fenestrations for young pig thoracic aortas digested for 2 h was 1.8 +/- 0.29 (SE) microns 2 and for the old pig aortas digested for 2 h was 1.7 +/- 0.11 (SE) microns 2. These values were not significantly different (p greater than 0.05), but the IEL from young pigs appeared rougher than the previously reported smooth IEL of the adult pigs.
Staining and Labeling
Alexander H
To quantitatively assess the viscoelastic properties of human skin, an in vivo testing method has been developed and previously reported. In this method, a strain-gauged pretension device is first used to determine the natural skin tension and then to apply a predetermined tension. A suction cup device with a rectangular cross-section and semi-circular ends is then applied to the pretensioned area and the skin deflection versus negative pressure characteristic is recorded. With the basic characteristics of the skin stress field determined by the geometry of the cup as a homogeneous stress state, the stress-strain response curve is computed from the recorded data. Using a constant pressurisation rate testing mode, the back and forearm of 116 healthy male and female subjects ranging in age from two to 67 years were tested. Variations in the shape and average slope (approximate modulus) of the stress-strain curves have been investigated with changes in age and sex. It has been found that the average slope decreases through maturation, reaches a minimum between the ages of 15 and 25, and then appears to increase with advancing age. The data points begin to diverge after approximately 30 years of age. It is hypothesised that this diverging phenomenon may be a result of the cumulative effect of ultraviolet radiation on the collagen and elastin networks. An examination of the shape of the curves appears to indicate that stiffness of collagen in the dermis increases with increasing age. However, it appears that the lower portions of the curves, possibly associated with the elastin and ground substance components, undergo changes not common to every individual. It is also hypothesised that 'scatter' in the data obtained from females and the sudden change noted in the shape of the curves at puberty may be due to hormonal changes.
Elastin changes during chronological and photo-ageing: the important role of lysozyme.
Cutaneous ageing, as a result of combined chronological and photo-ageing in sun-exposed areas, is accompanied by major modifications of the elastic fibres. We aimed to investigate qualitative and quantitative changes of dermal elastin fibres during cutaneous chronological and photo-ageing and the involvement of lysozyme in these processes. Morphological, age-related changes and variations in the relative elastin content in sun-protected (buttock) and sun-exposed (forearm and face) skin of healthy volunteers were studied (145 samples). The deposition of lysozyme in elastin fibres was studied using light and immuno-electron microscopy and taking into consideration the relative efficacy of different UV wavebands (UVA or SSR (solar simulated radiation)). Our studies also included the proteolytic degradation of elastin by human leucocyte elastase (HLE) in situ. Our results indicate a reduction of elastin content with age in sun-protected and sun-exposed skin, associated for the latter with high elastin content, resulting in elastosis. Total UVA (320-400 nm), and in particular long wave UVA (UVA-1, 340-400 nm), induces lysozyme deposition in elastin fibres to a higher extent than solar simulated radiation (SSR, 280-400 nm). Immuno-electron microscopy revealed lysozyme association with the electron-dense granular amorphous elastin structures, corresponding to a basophilic degeneration induced by sun exposure. Lysozyme has no elastolytic activity in situ; however, its binding to elastin limits elastin degradation by human leucocyte elastase (HLE). In addition, a direct inhibitory effect of lysozyme on HLE was observed. Our data suggest that lysozyme prevents elastin degradation by HLE after binding to the damaged parts of the elastin network and by direct lysozyme-HLE interaction, which reduces HLE proteolytic activity. These observations contribute to a better understanding of the chronological and photo-induced changes of the dermal elastic network.
Aged, 80 and over
Effects of infrared radiation on skin photo-aging and pigmentation.
Infrared radiation is increasingly and uncritically used for cosmetic and wellness purposes, despite the poorly understood biologic effects of such treatments on humans. In the present study, we investigated the effects of infrared radiation on collagen and elastin production in dermal fibroblasts, as well as the clinical and histopathologic effects of infrared radiation on photo-aged facial skin lesions. In order to determine the effects of infrared radiation on collagen and elastin production, dermal fibroblasts were exposed to infrared radiation for varying lengths of time and collagen and elastin contents were subsequently determined. Additionally, 20 patients with mild to moderate facial wrinkles and hyperpigmented lesions received daily treatments of far infrared radiation (900 to 1000 microm) for six-months. During the treatment, patients and a medical observer conducted independent photographic and clinical evaluations every 4 weeks, and skin biopsies were obtained for histological analysis at baseline and one month post-treatment. We found that the content of collagen and elastin produced by the fibroblasts increased after infrared radiation, and that this increase was proportional to the duration of irradiation exposure. Following 6 months of treatment, all patients reported good (51-75%) improvements in skin texture and roughness. Additionally, patients noted fair (25-50%) improvement in color tone of the skin; however, improvements in hyperpigmented lesions were not observed. Objective medical evaluation of the patients indicated that roughness and laxity were fairly improved, but there was no significant improvement in hyperpigmented lesions. Histological examination failed to reveal any differences as well. These results suggest that infrared radiation may have beneficial effects on skin texture and wrinkles by increasing collagen and elastin contents from the stimulated fibroblasts. Therefore, skin treatment with infrared radiation may be an effective and safe non-ablative remodeling method, and may also be useful in the treatment of photo-aged skin.
Age-dependent changes of airway and lung parenchyma in C57BL/6J mice.
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
In the current study, we hypothesize that senescent-dependent changes between airway and lung parenchymal tissues of C57BL/6J (B6) mice are not synchronized with respect to altered lung mechanics. Furthermore, aging modifications in elastin fiber and collagen content of the airways and lung parenchyma are remodeling events that differ with time. To test these hypotheses, we performed quasi-static pressure-volume (PV) curves and impedance measurements of the respiratory system in 2-, 20-, and 26-mo-old B6 mice. From the PV curves, the lung volume at 30 cmH(2)O pressure (V(30)) and respiratory system compliance (Crs) were significantly (P &lt; 0.01) increased between 2 and 20 mo of age, representing about 80-84% of the total increase that occurred between 2 and 26 mo of age. Senescent-dependent changes in tissue damping and tissue elastance were analogous to changes in V(30) and Crs; that is, a majority of the parenchymal alterations in the lung mechanics occurred between 2 and 20 mo of age. In contrast, significant decreases in airway resistance (R) occurred between 20 and 26 mo of age; that is, the decrease in R between 2 and 20 mo of age represented only 29% (P &gt; 0.05) of total decrease occurring through 26 mo. Morphometric analysis of the elastic fiber content in lung parenchyma was significantly (P &lt; 0.01) decreased between 2 and 20 mo of age. To the contrary, increased collagen content was significantly delayed until 26 mo of age (P &lt; 0.01, 2 vs. 26 mo). In conclusion, our data demonstrate that senescent-dependent changes in airway and lung tissue mechanics are not synchronized in B6 mice. Moreover, the reduction in elastic fiber content with age is an early lung remodeling event, and the increased collagen content in the lung parenchyma occurs later in senescence.
Effect of age and IGF-I administration on elastin gene expression in rat aorta.
An age-related decrease in elasticity of arteries has been found in clinical and experimental studies done during the past two decades. We have investigated molecular and endocrine aspects of that decrease by examining the effects of age and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) on rat aorta elastogenesis. For comparison, pulmonary elastogenesis was examined in the same experimental animals. Different aged groups of male Fischer 344 rats (barrier protected) were implanted with minipumps for a two-week infusion of either 0.1 N acetic acid (vehicle solution) or IGF-I (1.2 mg/kg/day). The DNA content (micrograms DNA/g tissue) decreased with age in aorta but remained fairly constant in lung. Administration of IGF-I increased the aortic DNA content in all but the oldest rats. Conversely, the DNA content of pulmonary tissue was significantly increased in only the youngest animals. The steady-state levels of tropoelastin mRNA decreased dramatically in both aorta and lung with increased age. The decrease was greater in lung than aorta. Administration of IGF-I elevated aortic tropoelastin mRNA steady-state levels, whereas lung tropoelastin mRNA levels were unaffected by IGF-I administration. Aortic tissue synthesized decreased amounts of insoluble elastin with increased age. These results establish a direct relationship between aortic tropoelastin mRNA levels and the synthesis of insoluble elastin in aging. Administration of IGF-I increased aortic elastin synthesis throughout the life span of the rat, although the proportionate increase diminished with age.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand.
Department of Dermatology, University of Oulu and Oulu University Hospital, Finland.
Aging of the skin is affected by intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Especially important extrinsic factor is ultraviolet radiation, which causes premature aging of the skin. Intrinsic aging is influenced by genetic factors, and changes in hormones. In menopause, changes in hormonal balance have been suggested to enhance aging of the skin.
Accordingly, several studies have been accomplished, in which hormone replacement therapy (HRT) has been used in order to prevent skin aging at or after the menopause. In this overview the results of previous studies, and a study done recently, are critically reviewed.
Hormone replacement therapy and the skin: beneficial effects: the case in favor of it.
 [Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand.  2000]
Hormone replacement therapy and the skin: beneficial effects: the case in favor of it.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2000 Apr; 79(4):244-9.
Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Freidrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany. johannes.koehler@med.uni-jena.de
Changes of dermal collagen and elastin content are characteristic for skin aging as well as for pathological skin conditions. To evaluate these changes, we used in vivo multiphoton laser tomography to measure two-photon excited autofluorescence (AF) and second harmonic generation (SHG). We tested 18 patients of all ages and calculated the SHG-to-AF aging index of dermis (SAAID). We observed a negative relationship between the SAAID and age, which was accelerated for the female (n=7) subgroup. The current findings are the first in vivo demonstration of this relationship, and they show that specific characteristics of aged skin such as the ratio of extracellular matrix components collagen and elastin can be evaluated by in vivo AF and SHG measurements using near-IR femtosecond laser pulses.
Aged, 80 and over
Supplementation with a complex of active nutrients improved dermal and epidermal characteristics in skin equivalents generated from fibroblasts from young or aged donors.
Cultured skin equivalent (SE, Mimeskin) was generated by co-culturing skin fibroblasts and keratinocytes on a collagen-glycosaminoglycan-chitosan dermal substrate. In order to examine donor age effect, fibroblasts from 19- (young) or 49- (aged) year-old females were used. Culture medium was supplemented with nutrients complex containing soy extract, tomato extract, grape seed extract, white tea extract, sodium ascorbate, tocopherol acetate, zinc gluconate and BioMarine complex. Epidermal and dermal structure and composition were examined after 42 and 60 days of culture. In untreated samples, SE generated from young fibroblasts was superior to SE from aged fibroblasts in all characteristics. Those include number and regularity of keratinocyte layers, number of keratinocytes expressing proliferation marker Ki67, content of collagen type I, fibrillin-1, elastin, and SE lifespan. Effects of nutritional supplementation were observed in SE from both young and aged fibroblasts, however, those effects were more pronounced in SE from aged fibroblasts. In epidermis, the treatment increased number of keratinocyte layers and delayed epidermal senescence. The number of cells expressing Ki67 was nine folds higher than those of controls, and was similar to that of young cell SE. In dermis, the treatment increased mRNA synthesis of collagen I, fibrillin-1 and elastin. In conclusion, skin cell donor age had major important effect on formation of reconstructed SE. Imperfections in epidermal and dermal structure and composition as well as life span in SE from aged cells can be improved by supplementation with active nutrients.
Lung development and susceptibility to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with emphysema has been considered to be an accelerated involutional disease of aging smokers. However, because only a proportion ( approximately 15%) of smokers develop chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with emphysema, clearly genetic susceptibility must play a significant part in determining both the age of onset and the rapidity of decline in lung function. In mice, interference with key genes, either by null mutation, hypomorphism, or gain or loss of function, results in phenotypes comprising either neonatal lethal respiratory distress if the structural effect is severe, or reduced alveolarization and/or early-onset emphysema if the effect is milder. Likewise, null mutants that interfere with matrix assembly and/or integrity, such as elastin, lysyl oxidase, or fibrillin, also result in alveolar dysplasia. Importantly, null mutation of Smad3, which encodes a receptor-activated Smad in the transforming growth factor-beta signaling pathway, results in a more subtle failure to correctly organize the alveolar matrix, which is in turn antecedent to early-onset emphysema mediated by matrix metalloproteinase-9. Furthermore, exposure to side-stream smoke profoundly exacerbates and accelerates alveolar destruction, leading to more severe early-onset emphysema in young Smad3-null mice (unpublished data). Interestingly, polymorphisms in the fibrillin, transforming growth factor-beta type II receptor, and matrix metalloproteinase-9 genes have been described in humans with emphysema. Thus, dysplastic or degraded matrix cannot provide the structural niche for alveolar stem/progenitor cells to assume the correct phenotype and/or repair the alveolar cell lineage niche. The hope is that providing the correct exogenous signals can coax them into doing so.
Aging and arterial structure-function relations.
Aging and hypertension interact and are associated with long-term changes in arterial structure and function. Systolic BP is not constant along the arterial tree due to different proportional contributions of forward and reflected pressure waves. Brachial cuff BP values are inadequate to detect these changes. Increased PP is the result of an imbalance between arterial flow and arterial impedance, which can be due to increased effective arterial wall stiffness or to a smaller proportional arterial diameter. After middle age, there is both dilation and stiffening of large arteries, along with increased effective stiffness caused by the corresponding changes in content of collagen, elastin, and VSM in the vascular wall. Intermediate conduit arteries also dilate with age but their functional characteristics remain relatively preserved. In the microcirculation, vasoconstriction, VSM hypertrophy and rarefaction accompany and may contribute to changes in organ function.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland - PDF
Arterial stiffness and extracellular matrix.
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, Centre for Applied Medical Research and University Clinic, School of Medicine, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. jadimar@unav.es
The growing prevalence and associated risk of arterial stiffness provide a major challenge to better understand the underlying causes and the resultant physiological impact of this condition. Structural components within the arterial wall, mainly collagen and elastin, are considered to be major determinants of arterial stiffness. Thus, quantitative and qualitative alterations of collagen and elastin fibers are involved in arterial stiffening that is associated with the aging process and disease states such as hypertension, diabetes, atherosclerosis, and chronic renal failure. Elucidation of mechanisms leading to the above alterations will aid in more specifically targeted therapeutic interventions because currently available cardiovascular medications fall short at reducing the stiffness of the large arteries. Reduction of arterial stiffness will likely have a significant impact on morbidity and mortality of older adults, as well as subjects suffering from cardiovascular and renal diseases.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland - PDF
Diabetes and arterial stiffening.
Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, New York, NY 11203-2098, USA. nwiner@downstate.edu
Type 2 diabetes (DM-2) has become a major global health problem that has been fueled mainly by increasing obesity and aging of the population. Most studies show that arterial stiffening occurs across all age groups in both type 1 diabetes and DM-2, and among those with impaired fasting glucose, impaired glucose tolerance, and the metabolic syndrome. Arterial stiffening in DM-2 results, in part, from the clustering of hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia and hypertension, all of which may promote insulin resistance, oxidative stress, endothelial dysfunction, and the formation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and advanced glycosylation end-products. Likewise, aging may increase arterial stiffening by altering the proportions of elastin and collagen in the aorta. The consequences of arterial stiffening are increased pulse pressure, hypertension, and a greater risk of cardiovascular disease. Treatment strategies to reduce or prevent arterial stiffening include pharmacologic agents that block the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, relax vascular smooth muscle, enhance release of nitric oxide from endothelial cells, and break glycosylation end-product cross-links, and fish oil supplementation.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland - PDF
Middermal elastolysis. Report of a case and immunohistochemical studies on the dermal distribution of fibrillin, vitronectin and amyloid P component.
A 39-year-old woman with demarcated wrinkled areas, histologically characterized by absence of elastic fibers in the middle and upper reticular dermis, is described. Immunoreactivity of vitronectin and amyloid P component, present at the periphery of elastic fibers in normal skin in adults, was absent from the middermis of lesional skin as were orcein stained fibers. C9 neoantigen immunoreactivity, associated with elastic fibers in sun-exposed skin of middle-aged and elderly individuals, was present in conjunction with elastic fibers in papillary and lower reticular dermis in lesional skin but was absent in the middermis. In contrast, a fibrillin immunoreactive network was present throughout the dermis, indicating that the elastin-associated microfibrils are retained in the absence of amorphous elastin in lesional skin of middermal elastolysis.
Accumulation of elafin in actinic elastosis of sun-damaged skin: elafin binds to elastin and prevents elastolytic degradation.
Elafin has a primary structure with two functional domains; a transglutaminase substrate domain at the N-terminus and a protease inhibitor domain at the C-terminus. Elafin expression has so far been reported only for epithelial tissues. Accumulation of elafin was immunohistochemically detected in the actinic elastosis of sun-damaged skin. Exposure of normal skin to UVA induced elafin expression that colocalized with elastic fibers. Incubation of synthetic transglutaminase substrate domain of elafin and elastin molecules in the presence of tissue transglutaminase in vitro resulted in the formation of a higher molecular complex on SDS-PAGE. Elafin expression was not detected in normal cultured skin fibroblasts, but was induced by UVA irradiation at both messenger RNA and protein levels. When radiolabeled insoluble elastin was incubated with recombinant full-length elafin and tissue transglutaminase, insoluble elastin became more resistant to neutrophil elastase digestion. These results indicate that (1) dermal fibroblasts potentially express elafin on UV irradiation, (2) UV-mediated elafin interacts with elastin, and (3) the elafin-elastin complex protects elastic fibers from elastolytic degradation, leading to the accumulation of elastic fibers in the actinic elastosis of sun-damaged skin. The transglutaminase substrate moiety of elafin plays an important role in anchoring elafin at its proper sites of action during UV-induced aging processes.
Effect of smoking on skin elastic fibres: morphometric and immunohistochemical analysis.
To determine quantitative and qualitative changes of the dermal elastic tissue of non-sun-exposed skin induced by smoking, as well as the possible mechanisms responsible for them.
Sixty-nine patients were recruited (20 nonsmokers, 19 former smokers and 30 smokers). Using static morphometry and immunohistochemistry and lectin staining we analysed elastic fibres of the dermis and their major components, elastin and microfibrillar component.
Significantly higher values for the number of elastic fibres mm(-2) and the percentage of the area filled by them in the reticular dermis were found in smokers. Cumulative tobacco dose showed statistically significant correlations with both morphological parameters (Spearman's rank correlation coefficient). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that the two main components of elastic fibres were altered in smokers. Plasma protease inhibitors and lectin staining were negative in all the samples.
Smoking is an independent risk factor for the increase of elastic fibres in the reticular dermis of nonexposed skin, and it acts on their two main structural components, elastin and microfibrillar component. This increase in the area of elastic fibres in smokers is not due to newly synthesized elastic material, but to their degradation, as occurs in solar elastosis and which acts in an additive manner.
Mesotherapy for facial skin rejuvenation: a clinical, histologic, and electron microscopic evaluation.
Skin Laser and Surgery Specialists of NY and NJ, New York, NY 10022, USA.
Mesotherapy, as broadly defined, represents a variety of minimally invasive techniques in which medications are directly injected into the skin and underlying tissue in order to improve musculoskeletal, neurologic, and cosmetic conditions. There are few clinical studies evaluating the efficacy and safety of mesotherapy in any form. This study evaluates the histologic and clinical changes associated with one of the simplest formulations of mesotheraphy commonly used for skin rejuvenation.
Ten subjects underwent four sessions of mesotherapy involving multiple injections of a multivitamin and hyaluronic acid solution. Treatment was conducted at 4 monthly intervals. All subjects had pre- and post-treatment photographs and skin biopsies. Skin biopsies were evaluated with routine histology, mucin and elastin stains, and electron microscopy. Patient surveys were also evaluated.
Evaluation of photographs at 0, 3, and 6 months revealed no significant clinical differences. Light microscopic examination of pre- and posttreatment specimens showed no significant changes. Electron microscopic analysis of collagen fibers measurements did show smaller diameter fibres posttreatment.
No significant clinical or histologic changes were observed after multivitamin mesotherapy for skin rejuvenation. Multivitamin and hyaluronic acid solution facial mesotherapy does not appear to provide any significant benefit.
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emailia, Modena, Italy.
Connective tissue shows peculiar and complex age-related modifications, which can be, at least in part, responsible for altered functions and increased susceptibility to diseases. Food restriction has long been known to prolong life in rodents, having antiaging effects on a variety of physiologic and pathologic processes. Therefore, the aorta has been investigated in rats fed normal or hypocaloric diet, from weaning to senescence. Compared with controls, caloric-restricted animals showed less pronounced age-dependent alterations such as elastic fiber degradation, collagen accumulation and cellular modifications. Immunocytochemical analyses revealed that elastic fibers were positively labelled for biglycan, decorin, ApoB100 (LDL), ApoA1 (HDL) and elastase and that the intensity of the reactions was time- and diet-dependent. With age, the major changes affecting aortic elastic fibers were increased positivity for decorin, LDL and elastase. Compared with age-matched normal fed rats, caloric restricted animals revealed lower content of LDL, decorin and elastase and higher positivity for HDL. These data suggest that a caloric restricted diet might influence the aging process of the arterial wall in rats, delaying the appearance of age-related degenerative features, such as structural alterations of cells and matrix and modified interactions of elastin with cells and with other extracellular matrix molecules.
Pathology Group, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary, University of London. s.e.greenwald@qmul.ac.uk
Conduit arteries become stiffer with age due to alterations in their morphology and the composition of the their major structural proteins, elastin and collagen. The elastic lamellae undergo fragmentation and thinning, leading to ectasia and a gradual transfer of mechanical load to collagen, which is 100-1000 times stiffer than elastin. Possible causes of this fragmentation are mechanical (fatigue failure) or enzymatic (driven by matrix metallo proteinases (MMP) activity), both of which may have genetic or environmental origins (fetal programming). Furthermore, the remaining elastin itself becomes stiffer, owing to calcification and the formation of cross-links due to advanced glycation end-products (AGEs), a process that affects collagen even more strongly. These changes are accelerated in the presence of disease such as hypertension, diabetes and uraemia and may be exacerbated locally by atherosclerosis. Raised MMP activity, calcification and impaired endothelial function are also associated with a high level of plasma homocysteine, which itself increases with age. Impaired endothelial function leads to increased resting vascular smooth muscle tone and further increases in vascular stiffness and mean and/or pulse pressure. The effect of increased stiffness, whatever its underlying causes, is to reduce the reservoir/buffering function of the conduit arteries near the heart and to increase pulse wave velocity, both of which increase systolic and pulse pressure. These determine the peak load on the heart and the vascular system as a whole, the breakdown of which, like that of any machine, depends more on the maximum loads they must bear than on their average. Reversing or stabilising the increased arterial stiffness associated with age and disease by targeting any or all of its causes provides a number of promising new approaches to the treatment of systolic hypertension and its sequelae, the main causes of mortality and morbidity in the developed world.
Copyright (c) 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Skin ageing and its treatment.
The effects of chronic sun exposure on skin are readily apparent when skin not typically exposed to the sun and skin regularly exposed to the sun are compared. While the sun is not the only aetiological factor in the dynamic process of skin ageing, it is the primary exogenous cause among several internal and environmental elements. Thus, photo-ageing, the main focus of this article, is a subset of extrinsic skin ageing. The influence of the sun in extrinsic skin ageing, as well as its role in potentially altering the normal course of intrinsic (also known as natural or cellular) ageing, is discussed. Telomeres, the specialized structures found at the ends of chromosomes, are believed to be integral to cellular ageing as well as in the development of cancer. The ageing process, both intrinsic and extrinsic, is also believed to be influenced by the formation of free radicals, also known as reactive oxygen species. The loss of collagen is considered the characteristic histological finding in aged skin. Wrinkling and pigmentary changes are directly associated with photo-ageing and are considered its most salient cutaneous manifestations. Such photodamage represents the cutaneous signs of premature ageing. In addition, deleterious consequences of chronic sun exposure, specifically various forms of photo-induced skin cancer, are also linked to acute and chronic sun exposure. The only known strategies aimed at preventing photo-ageing include sun avoidance, using sunscreens to block or reduce skin exposure to UV radiation, using retinoids to inhibit collagenase synthesis and to promote collagen production, and using anti-oxidants, particularly in combination, to reduce and neutralize free radicals.
Copyright (c) 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
[Roles of oxidative stress in photoaging and the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis].
Human skin is exposed to high amount of solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation, as well as to other environmental oxidants. Photoaging refers to the effect of long-term UV exposure and sun damage superimposed on intrinsically aged skin. The clinical photoaging features are dyspigmentation, laxity, wrinkles, and cutaneous malignancies. Most conspicuous photoaging change in dermis, which is caused by elastin materials accumulation, is termed "solar elastosis". Reactive oxygen species are known to be generated by UV radiation, and play an important role of photoaging. Although the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis (SSc) remains unknown, oxidative stress has been suggested to contribute to clinical manifestations associated with SSc, such as vascular damage including Raynaud's phenomenon. This review focuses on recent data including our data which have demonstrated the critical role of oxidative stress in photoaging and the pathogenesis of SSc.
J-STAGE, Japan Science and Technology Information Aggregator, Electronic
Transformation of amyloid-like fibers, formed from an elastin-based biopolymer, into a hydrogel: an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy study.
Previous studies have revealed the propensity of elastin-based biopolymers to form amyloid-like fibers when dissolved in water. These are of interest when considered as "ancestral units" of elastin in which they represent the simplest sequences in the hydrophobic regions of the general type XxxGlyGlyZzzGly (Xxx, Zzz = Val, Leu). We normally refer to these biopolymers based on elastin or related to elastin units as "elastin-like polypeptides". The requirement of water for the formation of amyloids seems quite interesting and deserves investigation, the water representing the natural transport medium in human cells. As a matter of fact, the "natural" supramolecular organization of elastin is in the form of beaded-string-like filaments and not in the form of amyloids whose "in vivo" deposition is associated with some important human diseases. Our work is directed, therefore, to understanding the mechanism by which such hydrophobic sequences form amyloids and any conditions by which they might regress to a non-amyloid filament. The elastin-like sequence here under investigation is the ValGlyGlyValGly pentapeptide that has been previously analyzed both in its monomer and polymer form. In particular, we have focused our investigation on the apparent stability of amyloids formed from poly(ValGlyGlyValGly), and we have observed these fibers evolving to a hydrogel after prolonged aging in water. We will show how atomic force microscopy can be combined with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy to gain an insight into the spontaneous organization of an elastin-like polypeptide driven by interfacial interactions. The results are discussed also in light of fractal-like assembly and their implications from a biomedical point of view.
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
Previous studies from our laboratories showed lung development differences between inbred strains of mice. In the present study, the C57BL/6J (B6) and DBA/2J (D2) strains were examined for senescent-dependent differences with respect to the lung structure and function. Specifically, we hypothesize that senescent changes in lung vary between strains due to identifiable gene expression differences. Quasi-static pressure-volume curves and respiratory impedance measurements were performed on 2- and 20-mo-old B6 and D2 mice. Lung volume at 30 cm H(2)O (V(30)) pressure was significantly (P &lt; 0.01) increased with age in both strains, but the increase was proportionally greater in D2 (68%) than in B6 (40%) mice. In addition, decreased elastic recoil pressure at 50% of V(30) and a reduction in airway resistance as a function of positive end-expiratory pressure were observed in 20-mo-old D2 mice but not in B6 mice. Morphometric analysis of lung parenchyma showed significant decreases in elastic fiber content with age in both strains, but the collagen content was significantly (P &lt; 0.01) increased with age in D2 but not B6 mice at 20 mo. Furthermore, using quantitative RT-PCR methods, gene expression differences between strains suggested that D2 mice significantly (P &lt; 0.05) downregulated the expressions of elastin (Eln) and procollagen I, III, and VI (Col1a1, Col3a1, and Col6a3) in lung tissue at 20 mo of age. These age-dependent changes were accompanied by an increased gene expression in matrix metalloproteinase 9 (Mmp9) in D2 and an increase in tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase (Timp1 and Timp4) in B6 mice. In conclusion, the results from the present study demonstrate that lung mechanics of both strains show significant age-dependent changes. However, changes in D2 mice are accelerated relative to B6 mice. Moreover, gene expression differences appear to be involved in the strain-specific changes of lung mechanic properties.
Role of proinflammatory alleles in longevity and atherosclerosis: results of studies performed on -1562C/T MMP-9 in centenarians and myocardial infarction patients from Sicily.
Candore G
Centenarians are characterized by marked delay or escape from age-associated diseases that cause mortality at earlier ages. Jointly, atherosclerosis and its complications, such as myocardial infarction (AMI), significantly contribute to mortality in the elderly. Inflammation is a key component of atherosclerosis and inflammatory genes are good candidates for the risk of the development of atherosclerosis. Genetic traits contribute to the risk of AMI and allelic variations in inflammatory genes should boost the risk of disease. If proinflammatory genotypes significantly contribute to the risk of AMI, alleles associated with disease susceptibility should not be included in the genetic background favoring longevity. Hence, genotypes of natural immunity should play an opposite role in atherosclerosis and longevity. Metalloproteinase (MMPs) are involved in tissue remodeling and therefore play a remarkable role in inflammation-based disease. MMPs are a family of Zn(2+)-dependent enzymes with proteolytic activity against connective tissue proteins such as collagens, proteoglycans, and elastin, which appear to play important roles in the development and progression of the atherosclerotic lesion. There is evidence indicating a role played by the MMPs in the weakening of atherosclerotic plaque which predisposes to lesion disruption. In this study we performed a genetic study on -1562C/T MMP-9 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in order to discern a possible role in AMI. We analyzed the distribution of this SNP in 115 AMI patients, 123 controls, and 34 centenarians from Sicily. We found no significant differences in the genetic distribution and allelic frequency of -1562C/T MMP-9 SNP between the studied groups. The present results are not in agreement with our previous findings, strengthening our hypothesis that genetic background protection against cardiovascular disease is a relevant component of the longevity trait, at least in the generation of Italian male centenarians under study. However, present results do not exclude that differential expression of MMP-9 playing an opposite role in AMI and longevity because other kinds of regulation might be more relevant than those linked to the SNP under study.
Aged, 80 and over
The slowly metabolized proteins of the extracellular matrix, typically collagen and elastin, accumulate reactive metabolites through uncontrolled non-enzymatic reactions such as glycation or the products arising from the reaction of unsaturated long chain fatty acid metabolites (possessing aldehydic groups). A typical example of these non-enzymatic changes is the formation of advanced glycation end-products (AGEs), resulting from the reaction of carbohydrates with the free amino group of proteins. The accumulation of AGEs and the resulting structural alterations cause altered tissue properties (increased stiffness, reduced elasticity) that contribute to their reduced catabolism and to their aging. Posttranslational nonenzymatic modifications of the proteins of the extracellular matrix (the formation of a typical AGE product--pentosidine) were studied in three types of tissue of three rat strains subjected to a high-fructose diet. Chronic (three-week) hyperglycemia (resulting from fructose loading) caused a significant increase in pentosidine concentration mainly in the aorta and skin of the three rat strains (Lewis, Wistar and hereditary hypertriglyceridemic rats).
Plasma skin regeneration delivers energy to the skin through plasma pulses induced by passing radiofrequency into nitrogen gas. Single-treatment, high-energy, 1-pass treatments have been demonstrated to achieve good results with an excellent safety profile. Eight volunteers underwent full-face treatments every 3 weeks, for a total of 3 treatments, using energy settings of 1.2 to 1.8 J. Before each subsequent treatment, the quality of regenerated epidermis, the degree of downtime, and erythema were recorded. Full-thickness skin biopsy specimens were obtained from 6 patients before treatment and 90 days following the last treatment. Patients were seen for follow-up 4 days after each treatment and 30 and 90 days after the third treatment.
Three months after treatment, investigators found a 37% reduction in facial rhytids and study participants noted a 68% improvement in overall facial appearance. Reepithelialization was complete in 4 days. Patients assessed erythema to persist an average of 6 days after treatment. Epidermal regeneration from the first treatment was longer than from the following treatments (9 vs 4 and 5 days, respectively). One patient developed localized hyperpigmentation after the first treatment, which resolved by follow-up at day 30. No scarring or hypopigmentation occurred. A histologic evaluation 3 months after treatment revealed a band of new collagen at the dermoepidermal junction with less dense elastin in the upper dermis. The mean depth of new collagen was 72.3 mum.
The progressive stiffening of the large arteries in humans that occurs during aging constitutes a potential risk factor for increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, and is accompanied by an elevation in systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure. While the underlying basis for these changes remains to be fully elucidated, factors that are able to influence the structure and composition of the extracellular matrix and the way it interacts with arterial smooth muscle cells could profoundly affect the properties of the large arteries. Thus, while age and sex represent important factors contributing to large artery stiffening, the variation in growth-stimulating factors and those that modulate extracellular production and homeostasis are also being increasingly recognized to play a key role in the process. Therefore, elucidating the contribution that genetic variation makes to large artery stiffening could ultimately provide the basis for clinical strategies designed to regulate the process for therapeutic benefit.
Elastin peptides (EPs) generated by hydrolysis of elastic fibers by elastinolytic enzymes display a wide spectrum of biological activities. Here, we investigated their influence on rat heart ischemia-mediated injury using the Langendorff ex vivo model. EPs, i.e., kappa elastin, at 1.32- and 660-nM concentrations, when administered before the ischemia period, elicited a beneficial influence against ischemia by accelerating the recovery rate of heart contractile parameters and by decreasing significantly creatine kinase release and heart necrosis area when measured at the onset of the reperfusion. All effects were S-Gal-dependent, as being reproduced by (VGVAPG)3 and as being inhibited by receptor antagonists, such as lactose and V14 peptide (VVGSPSAQDEASPL). EPs interaction with S-Gal triggered NO release and activation of PI3-kinase/Akt and ERK1/2 in human coronary endothelial cells (HCAECs) and rat neonatal cardiomyocytes (RCs). This signaling pathway, as designated as RISK, for reperfusion injury salvage kinase pathway, was shown to be responsible for the beneficial influence of EPs on ischemia/reperfusion injury on the basis of its inhibition by specific pharmacological inhibitors. EPs survival activity was attained at a concentration averaging that present into the blood circulation, supporting the contention that these matrikines might offer a natural protection against cardiac injury in young and adult individuals. Such protective effect might be lost with aging, since we found that hearts from 24-month-old rats did not respond to EPs.
Aging of the vascular-wall and atherosclerosis.
Centre de Recherche Bioclinique sur le Vieillissement, Groupe Hospitalier Charles Foix-Jean Rostand, 94205, Ivry sur Seine, France. 106517.545@compuserve.com
The rapid increase of life expectancy during the last half of the 20th century is changing the expression of cardiovascular disease and of its risk factors. These findings are examined by the separate consideration of atheromatous plaque formation and vascular wall stiffening, known as arteriosclerosis. in humans, these processes may progress together, but in some other species as the rat, only vascular wall stiffening is observed. A saturated fat- and cholesterol-rich diet produces the early appearance of lipidic plaques, which progress to fibrous, sometimes ulcerated, thrombotic lesions. This progression is age dependent; the establishment of lipidic plaques is not. Vascular wall stiffening, characterized by an increase of the collagen-elastin ratio and diffuse deposition of calcium and lipids is also age dependent (arteriosclerosis). Although hyperlipidemia appears to be involved both in plaque formation and wall thickness progression, the detailed mechanisms are not identical. In the oldest age group (above 80 years and in centenarians), high cholesterol values may not be a risk factor as in younger individuals. Among the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved, immune factors and modifications in receptor coupling appear to play a major role. These mechanisms are described in some detail.
Zonular fibers, multimolecular composition as related to function (elasticity) and pathology.
Zonular fibers (ZF) play an important role in accommodation. With the rapid increase over the last decade of the oldest part of the population in industrialized countries, age-dependent loss of accommodation became an increasingly important problem. It appeared therefore interesting to review old and recent literature on ZF, their composition, structure and pathological alterations. By comparing former and recent reports it appeared to us, that several previous reports were not sufficiently taken in consideration for the understanding of the rheological properties of ZF. Elastin and proteoglycans-glycosaminoglycans were reported previously as constituents of ZF. Their presence besides fibrillin, the major constituent, helps to explain the rheological properties of these fibers, and especially their elasticity and its age- and pathology-dependent decline. Our review points also to some of the major problems, which remain to be addressed by future experiments.
Elastic fibers are required for the elasticity and integrity of various organs. We and others previously showed that fibulin-5 (also called developing arteries and neural crest EGF-like [DANCE] or embryonic vascular EGF-like repeat-containing protein [EVEC]) is indispensable for elastogenesis by studying fibulin-5-deficient mice, which recapitulate human aging phenotypes caused by disorganized elastic fibers (Nakamura, T., P.R. Lozano, Y. Ikeda, Y. Iwanaga, A. Hinek, S. Minamisawa, C.F. Cheng, K. Kobuke, N. Dalton, Y. Takada, et al. 2002. Nature. 415:171-175; Yanagisawa, H., E.C. Davis, B.C. Starcher, T. Ouchi, M. Yanagisawa, J.A. Richardson, and E.N. Olson. 2002. Nature. 415:168-171). However, the molecular mechanism by which fiblin-5 contributes to elastogenesis remains unknown. We report that fibulin-5 protein potently induces elastic fiber assembly and maturation by organizing tropoelastin and cross-linking enzymes onto microfibrils. Deposition of fibulin-5 on microfibrils promotes coacervation and alignment of tropoelastins on microfibrils, and also facilitates cross-linking of tropoelastin by tethering lysyl oxidase-like 1, 2, and 4 enzymes. Notably, recombinant fibulin-5 protein induced elastogenesis even in serum-free conditions, although elastogenesis in cell culture has been believed to be serum-dependent. Moreover, the amount of full-length fibulin-5 diminishes with age, while truncated fibulin-5, which cannot promote elastogenesis, increases. These data suggest that fibulin-5 could be a novel therapeutic target for elastic fiber regeneration.
Elastin at the hinge portion of the eustachian tube cartilage in specimens from normal subjects and those with cleft palate.
Sando I
The density of elastin in the intermediate portion between the lateral lamina and the medial lamina of human eustachian tube (ET) cartilage was examined in six normal adults, seven normal children, and six children with cleft palate (CP) in order to obtain information about how the physical properties of the ET cartilage differ as a function of age and presence of CP. Cross sections of the midcartilaginous portions of the ETs that had been stained with Weigert's elastin stain were photographed at uniform magnification, the area for study was projected, and the meshlike are of the ET cartilage that stained elastin-positive was represented on paper by lines. A digitizer was used to measure the total length of all the lines representing elastin in each photomicrograph, and the mean was determined for each of the three groups. The mean density of elastin was significantly greater in normal adults than in normal children (Student's t test, t = 2.781; p less than .02). It was also significantly greater in normal children than in CP children (Wilcoxon t = 24.0; p less than .05). These results appear to indicate that CP children have poorer elasticity in this area of the ET cartilage, which might cause functional obstruction (floppiness) of the ET in those children.
Cleft Lip and Palate - MedlinePlus Health Information
Connective tissue structure of the tree shrew optic nerve and associated ageing changes.
Cell and Molecular Biology Unit, School of Optometry and Vision Sciences, Cardiff Institute of Tissue Engineering and Repair, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom. albonj@cardiff.ac.uk
To identify the structure and composition of the tree shrew optic nerve to determine its potential as a model for glaucoma.
Tree shrew optic nerves, aged 4 weeks to 5 years, were wax or cryoembedded for analysis of overall morphology and cellular (glial fibrillary acidic protein [GFAP]) and extracellular matrix (collagen types I, III, IV, V, VI; fibronectin; and elastin) immunolocalization studies. In addition, transmission and scanning electron microscopy were performed. In vivo optic disc imaging was performed by HRT2 and fundus camera photography.
The optic nerve of the tree shrew comprised regions comparable to the human prelaminar and lamina cribrosa (LC) in the optic nerve head and the retrolaminar region, immediately posterior. The multilayered connective tissue plates of tree shrew LC stretched across the optic nerve canal at the level of the sclera and consisted of collagen types I, III, IV, V, and VI; elastin; and fibronectin. Significant age-related alterations in connective tissue components were indicated. Connective tissue was present in the central retinal vessel sheaths and was identified as longitudinally oriented collagen fibrils in the retrolaminar optic nerve. GFAP immunofluorescence indicated a high concentration of astrocytic processes in the LC. Myelination of axons was evident in the retrolaminar optic nerve. Ultrastructural studies supported the structural organization and spatial distribution of connective tissue.
Fluorescence spectroscopy and birefringence of molecular changes in maturing rat tail tendon.
Tissue remodeling during maturation, wound healing, and response to vascular stress involves molecular changes of collagen and elastin in the extracellular matrix (ECM). Two optical techniques are effective for investigating these changes--laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) spectroscopy and polarizing microscopy. LIF spectroscopy integrates the signal from both elastin and collagen cross-linked structure, whereas birefringence is a measure of only collagen. Our purpose is (1) to evaluate the rat tail tendon (RTT) spectroscopy against data from purified extracted protein standards and (2) to correlate the two optical techniques in the study of RTT and skin. Spectra from tissue samples from 27 male rats and from extracted elastin and collagen were obtained using LIF spectroscopy (357 nm). Birefringence was measured on 5-mum histological sections of the same tissue. Morphometric analysis reveals that elastin represents approximately 10% of tendon volume and contributes to RTT fluorescence. RTT maximum fluorescence emission intensity (FEI(max)), which includes collagen and elastin, increases with animal weight (R(2)=0.64). Birefringence, when plotted against weight, increases to a plateau (nonlinear correlation: R(2)=0.90), tendon having greater birefringence than skin. LIF spectroscopy and collagen fiber birefringence are shown to provide complementary measurements of molecular structure (tendon birefringence versus FEI(max) at R(2)=0.60).
Elastin-elastases and inflamm-aging.
Faculty of Medicine Extracellular Matrix and Cell Signaling--Reims University, UMR 6198 CNRS 51095 Reims Cedex, France.
Degradation of elastin, the main amorphous component of elastic fibers, by elastases belonging to the serine, metallo, or cysteine families leads to the generation of elastin fragments, designated as elastokines in keeping with their cytokine-like properties. Generation of elastokines from one of the longest lived protein in human might represent a strong tissue repair signal. Indeed, they (1) exhibit potent chemotactic activity for leukocytes, (2) stimulate fibroblast and smooth muscle cell proliferation, and (3) display proangiogenic activity as potent as VEGF. However, continuous exposure of cells to these matrikines, through increased elastase(s) expression with age, can contribute to the formation of a chronic inflammatory state, that is, inflamm-aging. Importantly, binding of elastokines to S-Gal, their cognate receptor, proved to stimulate matrix metalloproteinase expression in normal and cancer cells. Besides, these elastin fragments can polarize lymphocytes toward a Th-1 response or induce an osteogenic response in smooth muscle cells, and arterial wall calcification. In this chapter, emphasis will be made on the contribution of elastokines on the genesis of age-related arterial wall diseases, particularly abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs). An elastokine theory of AAAs progression will be proposed. Age is one main risk factor of cancer incidence and development. The myriad of biological effects exerted by elastokines on stromal and inflammatory cells led us to hypothesize that they might be main actors in elaborating a favorable cancerization field in melanoma; for instance these peptides could catalyze the vertical growth phase transition in melanoma through increased expression of gelatinase A and membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase.
Age, hypertension and arterial function.
1. Ageing exerts a marked effect on the cardiovascular system and, in particular, the large arteries. Using a variety of techniques to assess arterial stiffness, many cross-sectional studies have demonstrated a significant relationship between age and aortic stiffness, although the age-related changes observed in peripheral arteries appear to be less marked. 2. The relationship between arterial stiffness and hypertension is more complex. The distending, or mean arterial, pressure is an important confounder of measurements of arterial stiffness and, therefore, must be taken into consideration when assessing arterial stiffness in hypertensive subjects or investigating the effect of antihypertensive agents. Current methods for correcting for differences in distending pressure involve pharmacological manipulation, statistical correction or mathematical manipulation of stiffness indices. 3. Many studies have provided evidence that both peripheral (muscular) and central (elastic) arteries are stiffer in subjects with mixed (systolic/diastolic) hypertension compared with normotensive subjects. However, it is unclear to what extent differences in mean arterial pressure explain the observed differences in hypertensive subjects. In contrast, isolated systolic hypertension is associated with increased aortic, but not peripheral artery, stiffness, although the underlying mechanisms are somewhat unclear. 4. Traditional antihypertensive agents appear to reduce arterial stiffness, but mostly via an indirect effect of lowering mean pressure. Therefore, therapies that target the large arteries to reduce stiffness directly are urgently required. Agents such as nitric oxide donors and phosphodiesterase inhibitors may be useful in reducing stiffness via functional mechanisms. In addition, inhibitors or breakers of advanced glycation end-product cross-links between proteins, such as collagen and elastin, hold substantial promise.
The human arterial system in youth is beautifully designed for its role of receiving spurts of blood from the left ventricle and distributing this as steady flow through peripheral capillaries. Central to such design is "tuning" of the heart to arterial tree; this minimizes aortic pressure fluctuations and confines flow pulsations to the larger arteries. With aging, repetitive pulsations (some 30 million/year) cause fatigue and fracture of elastin lamellae of central arteries, causing them to stiffen (and dilate), so that reflections return earlier to the heart; in consequence, aortic systolic pressure rises, diastolic pressure falls, and pulsations of flow extend further into smaller vessels of vasodilated organs (notably the brain and kidney). Stiffening leads to increased left ventricular (LV) load with hypertrophy, decreased capacity for myocardial perfusion, and increased stresses on small arterial vessels, particularly of brain and kidney. Clinical manifestations are a result of diastolic LV dysfunction with dyspnea, predisposition to angina, and heart failure, and small vessel degeneration in brain and kidney with intellectual deterioration and renal failure. While aortic stiffening is the principal cause of cardiovascular disease with age in persons who escape atherosclerotic complications, it is not a specific target for therapy. The principal target is the smooth muscle in distributing arteries, whose relaxation has little effect on peripheral resistance but causes substantial reduction in the magnitude of wave reflection. Such relaxation is achieved through regular exercise and with the vasodilating drugs that are used in modern treatment of hypertension and cardiac failure.
Aged, 80 and over
Sensitivity and Specificity
Mechanisms underlying hypertrophic remodeling and increased stiffness of mesenteric resistance arteries from aged rats.
The mechanisms associated with structural and mechanical alterations of mesenteric resistance arteries from aged rats were investigated by using pressure myography, confocal microscopy, immunofluorescence, and picrosirius red staining. Arteries from old rats showed: (i) increased wall and media thickness, greater number of smooth muscle cell (SMC) layers but decreased density of SMC; (ii) increased number of adventitial cells; (iii) hypertrophy of nuclei of SMC and endothelial cells; (iv) increased stiffness associated with increased total collagen content and collagen I/III deposition in the media; and (v) similar content but changes in elastin structure in the internal elastic lamina. Hypertrophic outward remodeling in aged rat resistance arteries involve adventitial cells hyperplasia, reorganization of the same number of hypertrophied SMC in more SMC layers leading to thickened media and endothelial cell hypertrophy. Fibrosis associated with collagen deposition and changes in elastin structure might be responsible for the increased stiffness of resistance arteries from aged rats.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA 90502, USA. okhorram@obgyn.humc.edu
The uterine environment may influence the development of chronic diseases later in life. The authors hypothesized that maternal nutritional restriction prenatally induces remodeling of offspring blood vessels such that they become stiff and contribute to the development of adult hypertension. To test this hypothesis, the authors studied the blood vessels of offspring of dams that were exposed to 50% maternal food restriction (MFR) from e10 to term as compared to age-matched controls. In aortas of MFR offspring, there was a significant increase in elastin and glycosaminoglycans (GAG) at 1 day of age. By 2 months of life, there was a significant increase in collagen and a decrease in GAG in MFR offspring aortas. A redistribution of elastin was also noted in MFR offspring, with a significant decrease in the interelastin laminae at both 1 day and 2 months. In mesenteric arterioles of MFR offspring, there was a decrease in GAG in 1-day-old and 2-month-old MFR offspring. There were no changes in elastin in both age groups in mesenteric arterioles, and by 2 months of life, collagen deposition was also found in these resistance vessels. There was a significant increase in expression of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) mRNA in 1-day-old MFR aortas, while both MMP-9 and MMP-2 expression was increased in the 4-month-old MFR aortas. These results indicate a significant remodeling of the extracellular matrix occurs in both conduit and resistance vessels. By 2 months of life, the compositions of both vessel types are consistent with stiff vessels, a contributing factor to hypertension.
In a mouse model, we investigated whether different exposure protocol of ultraviolet-B with the same total doses could induce a different degree of photodamage in mouse skin. Two different exposure frequencies, three times or six times a week, were applied under the condition of weekly same cumulative irradiation dose equally for 10 weeks. Then the photodamage parameters such as skin wrinkling, histochemical dermal change and epidermal and dermal thickness were evaluated. Wrinkle grade, histological assessment by score, and dermal thickness did not reveal any difference between the two groups. However, at irradiation week 10 epidermal thickness of the three times a week irradiation group was significantly thicker than that of the six times a week irradiation group. The same cumulative dose resulted in different epidermal thickness. Our results suggested that exposure frequency or scheduling could influence the epidermal damage by ultraviolet radiation even though the cumulative dose is equal.
Ocular fundus auto-fluorescence observations at different wavelengths in patients with age-related macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy.
Post-translational protein modification by lipid peroxidation products or glycation is a feature of aging as well as pathologic processes in postmitotic cells at the ocular fundus exposed to an oxidative environment. The accumulation of modified proteins such as those found in lipofuscin and advanced glycation end products (AGEs) contribute greatly to the fundus auto-fluorescence. The distinct fluorescence spectra of lipofuscin and AGE enable their differentiation in multispectral fundus fluorescence imaging.
A dual-centre consecutive case series of 78 pseudo-phacic patients is reported. Digital colour fundus photographs as well as auto-fluorescence images were taken from 33 patients with age related macular degeneration (AMD), 13 patients with diabetic retinopathy (RD), or from 32 cases without pathologic findings (controls). Fluorescence was excited at 475-515 nm or 476-604 nm and recorded in the emission bands 530-675 nm or 675-715 nm, respectively. Fluorescence images excited at 475-515 nm were taken by a colour CCD-camera (colour-fluorescence imaging) enabling the separate recording of green and red fluorescence. The ratio of green versus red fluorescence was calculated within a representative region of each image.
The 530-675 nm auto-fluorescence in AMD patients was dominated by the red emission (green vs. red ratio, g/r = 0.861). In comparison, the fluorescence of the diabetics was green-shifted (g/r = 0.946; controls: g/r = 0.869). Atrophic areas (geographic atrophy, laser scars) showed massive hypo-fluorescence in both emission bands. Hyper-fluorescent drusen and exudates, unobtrusive in the colour fundus images as well as in the fluorescence images with emission &gt;667 nm, showed an impressive green-shift in the colour-fluorescence image.
Lipofuscin is the dominant fluorophore at long wavelengths (&gt;675 nm or red channel of the colour fluorescence image). In the green spectral region, we found an additional emission of collagen and elastin (optic disc, sclera) as well as deposits in drusen and exudates. The green shift of the auto-fluorescence in RD may be a hint of increased AGE concentrations.
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New Jersey Medical School, 185 S Orange Ave, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.
We analyzed the effects of gender differences in aging on in vivo measurements of aortic pressure and diameter and on extracellular matrix of the thoracic aorta in young adult (age, 6.6+/-0.5 years) versus old adult (age, 21.2+/-0.2 years) monkeys (Macaca fascicularis). Aortic stiffness, as represented by the pressure strain elastic modulus (Ep), increased more in old male monkeys (5.08+/-0.81; P&lt;0.01) than in old females (3.06+/-0.52). In both genders, collagen density was maintained, collagen-bound glycation end products increased, and collagen type 1 decreased. However, elastin density decreased significantly (from 22+/-1.5% to 15+/-1.2%) with aging (P&lt;0.05) only in males. Furthermore, only old males were characterized by a decrease (P&lt;0.05) in collagen type 3 (an isoform that promotes elasticity) and an increase in collagen type 8 (an isoform that promotes the neointimal migration of vascular smooth muscle cells). In contrast to the data in monkeys, collagen types 1 and 3 both increased significantly in aging rats.
There are major species differences in the effects of aging on aortic collagen types 1 and 3. Furthermore, because alterations in collagen density, collagen content, hydroxyproline, and collagen advanced glycation end products were similar in both old male and female monkeys, these factors cannot be responsible for the greater increase in stiffness in old males. However, changes in collagen isoforms and the decrease in elastin observed only in old males likely account for the greater increase in aortic stiffness.
A histological and histometric study of the periosteum in mandibular ramal and condylar areas of the rabbit.
Department of Orthodontics, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
These structures were investigated with various histological stains and by polarization microscopy. The width of the periosteal layers was measured in nine ramal and condylar areas at five different ages (0, 2, 6, 12 and 30 weeks). The total periosteal width changed during growth, as did the absolute and relative thickness of its cellular and fibrous layers. The results suggest that in these areas periosteal tension may influence growth of the condylar cartilage, and that this may vary during growth.
Mandible/anatomy &amp; histology*
Mandibular Condyle/anatomy &amp; histology*
Lung development and adult lung diseases.
Adult respiratory diseases are caused by many factors, including genetic-environmental interaction. Genetic abnormalities can impact early fetal lung development, postnatal lung maturation, as well as adult lung injury and repair. Studies suggest that abnormally developed lung structure and function may contribute as a susceptibility factor for several adult lung diseases. This review focuses on the relationship between lung development and pathogenesis of several lung diseases including COPD, cystic fibrosis (CF), and asthma. COPD with emphysema has been considered to be an accelerated involutional disease of aging smokers. However, since only a proportion (approximately 15%) of smokers get COPD with emphysema, clearly genetic susceptibility must play a significant part in determining both the age of onset and the rapidity of decline in lung function. In mice, interference with key genes either by null mutation, hypomorphism, or gain or loss of function results in phenotypes comprising either neonatal lethal respiratory distress if the structural effect is severe, or reduced alveolarization and/or early onset emphysema if the effect is milder. Reported susceptibility candidate genes are therefore discussed in some detail, including elastin, lysyl oxidase, fibrillin, the transforming growth factor-beta-Smad3 pathway, as well as extracellular matrix proteases. In the case of CF, the Cftr gene has been shown to regulate fetal lung epithelial cell differentiation and maturation. Subtle abnormalities of lung structure and function are found in clinically asymptomatic CF infants. Finally, airway remodeling due to chronic inflammation is important in infants who later acquire asthma.
Regulation of the extracellular matrix remodeling by lutein in dermal fibroblasts, melanoma cells, and ultraviolet radiation exposed fibroblasts.
School of Science and Mathematics, Georgian Court University, Lakewood, NJ, USA. nphilips@fdu.edu
With aging and cancer there is increased expression or activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that degrade and remodel the structural extracellular matrix (ECM). In addition, exposure of skin to ultraviolet (UV) radiation (photoaging) leads to loss of cell viability, membrane damage, and deposition of excessive elastotic material. Lutein has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, photoprotective, and anti-carcinogenic properties. The goal of this research was to investigate lutein's anti-aging and anti-carcinogenic effects via the regulation of the extracellular matrix remodeling. To this purpose, the effects of lutein on the expression of MMPs and their inhibitors (TIMPs, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases) in dermal fibroblasts (intrinsic aging) and melanoma cells were examined. Further, for lutein's photoprotective effects, the regulation of cell viability, membrane integrity, and elastin expression in the non-irradiated, and UVA or UVB radiation exposed fibroblasts were analyzed. Lutein significantly inhibited MMP-1 expression, transcriptionally, and MMP-2 protein levels in dermal fibroblasts, without altering TIMPs expression. It significantly inhibited MMP-1 expression in melanoma cells while stimulating TIMP-2. Lutein did not alter fibroblast or melanoma cell viability or membrane integrity. In ultraviolet radiation exposed fibroblasts, lutein improved cell viability, membrane integrity and inhibited elastin expression, though more significantly in the UVB exposed fibroblasts. In summary, the mechanism to lutein's anti-aging and anti-carcinogenic effects include the inhibition of MMP to TIMP ratio in dermal fibroblasts and melanoma cells, and the inhibition of cell loss, membrane damage and elastin expression in ultraviolet radiation exposed fibroblasts.
Global expression profiles from C57BL/6J and DBA/2J mouse lungs to determine aging-related genes.
Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
This study identified gene expression profiles that provided evidence for genomic mechanisms underlying the pathophysiology of aging lung. Aging lungs from C57BL/6 (B6) and DBA/2 (D2) mouse strains differ in physiology and morphometry. Lungs were harvested from B6 mice at 2, 18, and 26 mo and from D2 mice at 2 and 18 mo of age. Purified RNA was subjected to oligonucleotide microarray analyses, and differential expression analyses were performed for comparison of various data sets. A significant majority of differentially expressed genes were upregulated with aging in both strains. Aging D2 lungs uniquely exhibited upregulation in stress-response genes including xenobiotic detoxification cascades. In contrast, aging B6 lungs showed downregulation of heat shock-response genes. Age-dependent downregulation of genes common to both B6 and D2 strains included several collagen genes (e.g., Col1a1 and Col3a1). There was a greater elastin gene (Eln) expression in D2 mice at 2 mo, and Eln was uniquely downregulated with age in this strain. The matrix metalloproteinase 14 gene (Mmp14), critical to alveolar structural integrity, was also downregulated with aging in D2 mice only. Several polymorphisms in the regulatory and untranslated regions of Mmp14 were identified between strains, suggesting that variation in Mmp14 gene regulation contributes to accelerated aging of lungs in D2 mice. In summary, lungs of B6 and D2 mice age with variable rates at the gene expression level, and these quantifiable genomic differences provide a template for understanding the variability in age-dependent changes in lung structure and function.
Elastin structure in health and disease.
Sandberg LB
[Effects of rejuvenation by intense pulsed light and basic mechanism thereof].
To evaluate the effects of rejuvenation by intense pulsed light (IPL) and the mechanism thereof.
Fifty-eight patients with photo aging were treated with IPL of single, double, or triple pulse pattern for 3 - 5 times with the intervals of 3 - 4 weeks. Three weeks after the last treatment, photography was conducted and the pictures underwent grading by the physicians and patients according to blind method. Skin specimens of the posteroinferior ear lobe or the nape were obtained from 4 patients to undergo HE staining, Uana orcein staining of elastin, immunohistochemical staining for collagenous fibers of types I and III, and transmission electron microscopy was conducted in 2 of the 4 patients. Skin digitalized image analysis was conducted on 34 female patients to measure and analyze the depth and width of dermatographs, roughness of skin.
After the third treatment, the wrinkles and skin texture of 62.1% of the patients showed improvement, and 84.60% of the pigmented lesions and 81.25% of the vascular lesions showed improvement. Pathology showed that type I and type III collagen increased while elastin decreased, and the fibers were orderly re-arranged. Transmission electron microscopy showed that after treatment the fibroblasts increased in number and became more active in secretion and there were more collagen fibers orderly re-arranged in the stroma. Digitalized image analysis showed significant improvement in skin smoothness, depth, arithmetic average roughness and average roughness of skin texture (all P &lt; 0.01).
IPL is effective to improve the skin texture. The mechanism may be the increasing of the activity of the fibroblasts, and hyperplasia and re-arrangement of collagen and elastin.
Age-related changes of microfibrils in the cornea and trabecular meshwork of the human eye.
Microfibrils in the connective tissue can be subdivided into two classes, elastin-associated and elastin-independent microfibrils. The distribution of microfibrils of both classes were studied in the anterior segment of the human ocular tissues, with a view to examine age-related morphological changes. In the trabecular meshwork of infants, the tubular structure of microfibrils was identified and the fibrils were associated with elastin, forming a typical elastic fiber. This was confirmed by the tannic acid-uranyl acetate staining which reacts specifically with elastin. In the cornea, microfibrils were detected in the deep stroma of the infant. They were not associated with elastin (elastin-independent microfibrils). In the glaucomatous eye of a 7-year-old boy, microfibrils were indistinct in the trabecular meshwork. In the corneal stroma of the same eye, microfibrils were observed, but the occurrence was rarer than in the nonglaucomatous infants examined in this study. In the trabecular meshwork of aged persons, no tubular or fibrillar structure was seen around the elastin. Microfibrils were not observed in the cornea. The morphological features and occurrence of microfibrils change with age in the anterior segment of the human eye. Thus microfibrils can be a good indicator for the age-related changes in these tissues.
Aged, 80 and over
Laboratory of Hemodynamics and Cardiovascular Technology, Institute for Bioengineering and Biotechnology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. martin.zulliger@epfl.ch
Stiffening of the aorta with progressing age leads to decrease of aortic compliance and thus to an increase of pulse pressure amplitude. Using a strain energy function (SEF) which takes into account the composition of the arterial wall, we have studied the evolution of key structural components of the human thoracic aorta using data obtained from the literature. The SEF takes into account the wavy nature of collagen, which upon gradual inflation of the blood vessel is assumed to straighten out and become engaged in bearing load. The engagement of the individual fibers is assumed to be distributed log-logistically. The use of a SEF enables the consideration of axial stretch (lambda(z)) and residual strain (opening angle) in the biomechanical analysis. Both lambda(z) and opening angle are known to change with age. Results obtained from applying the SEF to the measurements of aortic pressure-diameter curves indicate that the changes in aortic biomechanics with progressing age are not to be sought in the elastic constants of elastin and collagen or their volume fractions of the aortic wall but moreover in alterations of the collagen mesh arrangement and the waviness of the collagen fibers. In old subjects, the collagen fiber ensemble engages in load bearing much more abruptly than in young subjects. Reasons for this change in collagen fiber dynamics may include fiber waviness remodeling or cross-linkage by advanced glycation end-products (AGE). The abruptness of collagen fiber engagement is also the model parameter that is most responsible for the decreased compliance at progressed ages.
Aged, 80 and over
The skin is increasingly exposed to ambient UV-irradiation thus increasing its risk for photooxidative damage with longterm detrimental effects like photoaging, which is characterized by wrinkles, loss of skin tone, and resilience. Photoaged skin displays prominent alterations in the cellular component and the extracellular matrix of the connective tissue with an accumulation of disorganized elastin and its microfibrillar component fibrillin in the deep dermis and a severe loss of interstitial collagens, the major structural proteins of the dermal connective tissue. The unifying pathogenic agents for these changes are UV-generated reactive oxygen species (ROS) that deplete and damage non-enzymatic and enzymatic antioxidant defense systems of the skin. As well as causing permanent genetic changes, ROS activate cytoplasmic signal transduction pathways in resident fibroblasts that are related to growth, differentiation, senescence, and connective tissue degradation. This review focuses on the role of UV-induced ROS in the photodamage of the skin resulting in biochemical and clinical characteristics of photoaging. In addition, the relationship of photoaging to intrinsic aging of the skin will be discussed. A decrease in the overall ROS load by efficient sunscreens or other protective agents may represent promising strategies to prevent or at least minimize ROS induced photoaging.
Clusterin associates with altered elastic fibers in human photoaged skin and prevents elastin from ultraviolet-induced aggregation in vitro.
Clusterin is a secreted glycoprotein with stress-induced expression in various diseased and aged tissues. It shares basic features with small heat shock proteins because it may stabilize proteins in a folding-competent state. Besides its presence in all human body fluids, clusterin associates with altered extracellular matrix proteins, such as beta-amyloid in Alzheimer senile plaques in the brain. Because dermal connective tissue alterations occur because of aging and UV radiation, we explored the occurrence of clusterin in young, aged, and sun-exposed human skin. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that clusterin is constantly associated with altered elastic fibers in aged human skin. Elastotic material of sun-damaged skin (solar elastosis), in particular, revealed a strong staining for clusterin. Because of the striking co-localization of clusterin with abnormal elastic material, we investigated the interaction of clusterin with elastin in vitro. A chaperone assay was established in which elastin was denatured by UV irradiation in the absence or presence of clusterin. This assay demonstrated that clusterin exerted a chaperone-like activity and effectively inhibited UV-induced aggregation of elastin. The interaction of both proteins was further analyzed by electron microscopy, size exclusion chromatography, and mass spectrometry, in which clusterin was found in a stable complex with elastin after UV exposure.
Laboratory of Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Pharmaceutical, Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium.
Early diagnosis and monitoring progression of chronic diseases in elastin-rich tissues, such as chronic progressive lymphoedema in draught horses and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is still a real challenge in the horse. Use of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect anti-elastin antibody (AEAb) levels might be useful to assess the status of such diseases. Baseline levels, representing physiological breakdown of elastin in normal horses, are not available at present.
Levels of AEAb in healthy horses are generally low and follow the same age-related pattern as found in man. Therefore, elevation of AEAb levels in serum can be used to evaluate pathological elastin breakdown in elastin-rich tissues.
Sera of 84 clinically healthy Warmblood horses were evaluated for the presence of AEAbs by means of a modified version of an ELISA technique used in man. The horses were divided in 5 age groups: A) &lt; 4 months; B) 4-23 months; C) 2-3 years; D) 4-10 years; and E) &gt; 11 years.
Antibodies to elastin were found in all equine serum samples tested. Their levels were lowest in Group A, low in Groups B and E and highest in animals age 2-10 years.
Measuring AEAbs in serum of horses by an ELISA technique proved to be possible and levels were stable during well-defined life stages.
Changes in AEAb levels are expected to be useful for early diagnosis and for monitoring progression of diseases that affect elastin-rich tissues, such as chronic progressive lymphoedema and COPD.
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay/standards
Sensitivity and Specificity
Laboratory of Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Pharmaceutical, Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium.
Chronic progressive lymphoedema (CPL) is a recently recognised disease of the lymphatic system characterised by lesions in the skin of the lower legs in several draught horse breeds, including the Belgian Draught hourse. Clinical signs slowly progress and result in severe disfigurement of the limbs. Ideally, supportive treatment should be started early in the disease process. However early diagnosis and monitoring progression of CPL is still a challenge.
An ELISA technique was used to evaluate levels of AEAbs in sera of 97 affected Belgian Draught horses that were clinically healthy except for possible skin lesions, associated with CPL in their distal limbs. The horses were divided into 5 groups according to the severity of these skin lesions: normal horses (Group 1, n = 36), horses with mild lesions (Group 2, n = 43), horses with moderate lesions (Group 3, n = 8), horses with severe lesions (Group 4, n = 10) and, as a control, healthy Warmblood horses, unaffected by the disease (Group 5, n = 83).
Horses with clinical signs of CPL had significantly higher AEAb levels compared to clinically normal Belgian Draught horses and to healthy Warmblood horses. These levels correlated with severity of lesions.
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay/standards
Sensitivity and Specificity
'Ageing is a multistep, multifaceted, time-dependent phenomenon characterized by the decreased ability of a system to respond to exogenous and endogenous stress from either physical, chemical or biologic agents'. Cutaneous ageing provides a visible model of the interaction between endogenous (intrinsic) factors and exogenous (extrinsic) factors. In skin, the principal extrinsic-factor is ultraviolet light (UV) which is responsible for the constellation of changes termed photoageing. In recent years, much interest has been directed towards defining the ageing processes in skin and excellent comprehensive reviews have been compiled. This review aims to highlight several areas of developing knowledge, and focuses on the potential importance of environmental changes as they influence skin ageing and carcinogenesis. Repeated reference to the effects of UV on the skin are inevitable in any review of skin ageing and this is scarcely surprising as the skin contains many cells as well as subcellular and extracellular chromophores which are capable of absorbing energy within the UV spectrum. Cellular chromophores include among others keratinocytes, melanocytes, Langerhans cells, dermal fibroblasts and mast cells. Subcellular chromophores include keratin, melanin, collagen, elastin and a number of proteins, lipids and steroids (such as vitamin D). Urocanic acid, a photoisomerization product of the amino-acid histidine, may provide some limited photoprotection and some believe it to be important in UV induced immunosuppression. Understanding events at the molecular and biochemical level has unfortunately not been paralleled by clinical advances and the common, troublesome skin-problems of old age such as cancer, xerosis and pruritus remain a major cause of morbidity and yet are poorly explained.
Biochemistry and functional significance of collagen cross-linking.
The biophysical characteristics of vascular tissues are dependent largely on the properties of fibrillar collagens. Considering the predominant structural component, collagen type I, the present review describes the mechanisms of formation and maturation of lysyl oxidase-mediated cross-linking, leading to an understanding of how intracellular collagen-modifying enzymes affect the patterns of cross-links produced. An important distinction is made between the enzyme-mediated cross-linking, essential for optimum tissue function, and the non-enzymatic aging processes that generally lead to structural changes deleterious to function. Finally, the extracellular matrix of vascular tissue is a multicomponent system and the role of other major constituents, such as elastin and glycosaminoglycans, in modifying tissue properties should be considered. Some details of newer methods being developed to quantify these constituents will be presented.
Portland Press
Fibrillar proteins, such as collagens type I and III, and elastin are components of the extracellular matrix. They form an intricate widespread network that provides a basis for maintaining the physical structure of the heart and vessels and also play an important role in determining cardiovascular function. Physiologically, collagen and elastin fibres are enzymatically cross-linked to form matrix. In addition to these enzymatically formed cross-links, collagen fibres may be linked non-enzymatically, most notably by formation of AGEs (advanced glycation end-products). AGEs are formed by a reaction between reducing sugars and body proteins; they are formed increasingly in diabetes mellitus and hypertension and they accumulate with aging. There are several mechanisms whereby AGEs may affect cardiovascular structure and function. These include increased myocardial and vascular stiffness and (upon reaction with their receptors) inflammatory reactions, release of growth factors and cytokines, and increased oxidative stress. Therefore breaking AGEs appears as a promising tool in the therapy of cardiovascular injury related to diabetes, hypertension and aging. Breakers of AGE cross-links have been developed and one of them, alagebrium, has been extensively studied. This brief review discusses the formation of AGEs, their role in mediating cardiovascular injury, as well as the results of experimental and clinical studies involving alagebrium.
Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/metabolism
Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
Portland Press
Prolonged exposure to hyperoxia markedly inhibits normal lung development (alveolarization and respiratory surface area expansion) in immature animals. Since (a) hyperoxia results in excess hydroxyl radical (OH.) formation, (b) (OH.) is implicated in O2-induced lipid peroxidation and DNA alterations, and (c) both OH. formation and its interaction with DNA are Fe++ dependent; chelation of Fe++ should act to protect against pulmonary O2 toxicity and hyperoxic inhibition of lung development. We therefore treated litters of newborn rats with the iron chelator Deferoxamine mesylate (DES) (150 mg/kg/day) during a 10-day exposure to greater than 95% O2. Morphometric analysis demonstrated that compared to the mean airspace size in air control rat pups (Lm = 44.5 microns), hyperoxic exposure resulted in a 34% larger mean air space diameter in O2-saline rat lungs (59.5 microns) versus only an 11% enlargement in O2-DES lungs (51.1 microns*). Lung internal surface area (cm2) per 100-g body weight were air control = 4480, O2-saline = 3570 (decreases 20.3%), and O2-DES = 4125* (decreases 7.9%) (*p less than 0.05 versus O2-saline group). DES-treated animals also had significantly decreased lung conjugated diene levels during hyperoxic exposure and increased lung elastin content (reflective of preserved lung alveolar formation) compared to O2-saline rats. These results indicate that DES treatment substantially ameliorated the inhibitory effects of neonatal hyperoxic exposure on normal lung development.
Chronic ultraviolet (UV) irradiation is known to cause a variety of changes in the skin, including wrinkles, pigmented spots and carcinogenesis. To explore time dependent changes in several parameters with chronic UV irradiation, we examined the molecular changes in connective tissue, intracellular defence enzymes and free radical antioxidant substances in hairless mice skin caused by chronic exposure to UV-A including 2% UV-B. Connective tissue changes were estimated using hydroxyproline and isodesmosine assays as a measure of collagen and elastin concentrations, respectively. After 6 weeks irradiation, the insoluble collagen and elastin were both substantially elevated, as were the activities of glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) and superoxide dismutase (SOD). Continued UV irradiation resulted in a steady decline in SOD and lipid soluble antioxidants, while the GSH-Px remained elevated, suggesting that SOD and lipid soluble antioxidants in the skin may be involved in protecting it from UV damage and deteriorate with chronic irradiation.
Down-regulation of lysyl oxydase-like in aging and venous insufficiency.
Department of Medical Specialities, Networking Research Center on Biomaterials and Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain.
Elastin expression is higher in tissues where elastic fibres are essential for the correct maintenance of function such as blood vessels. Elastin expression usually diminishes with age, however, it may be re-expressed in response to injury or repair processes. Some authors attribute the characteristic loss of elasticity of the varicose vein to a drop in the population of smooth muscle cells in the media layer. A reduction in elastin has been observed in chronic venous insufficiency, but little is known about some of the factors involved in elastin synthesis such as lysyl oxidases. The aim of this study was to examine the in vivo expression of the elastin precursor, tropoelastin (TE), and lysyl oxidase-like 1 (LOXL1), a cross-linking enzyme responsible for elastin polymer deposition. The effects of age on these expression patterns were also evaluated.
Saphenous vein segments were obtained during surgery from organ donors (controls, n=20) and subjects with venous insufficiency (varicose veins, n=20). Both these groups were subdivided according to subject age into &lt;50 years (n=10) and &gt;or=50 years (n=10). Control and varicose vein tissue specimens were immunolabelled using anti-tropoelastin and anti-LOXL1 antibodies and also subjected to Western blot analysis.
The already established reduction in elastin in the varicose condition may be related, at least in part, to the decreased LOXL1 levels observed here. These events could reduce spontaneous reticulation of elastin and the partial loss of tissue elasticity in this group of patients.
Aged, 80 and over
F. Hernandez
[Enzymatic and nonenzymatic linking elements, their development and significance in physiologic, pathologic and gerontologic changes in the body].
Between the aggregated and in tissues properly deposited collagen molecules crosslinking elements, e.g. pyridinoline and deoxy-pyridinoline, are enzymatically formed. These triple-functional crosslinks are located at specific sites of the collagen chains, bind covalently its molecules, and contribute to the stability of collagen structure. Analogical quadruple-functional crosslinks are formed in the elastin, i.e. desmosine and isodesmosine, which have essential physiological functions in the body. When either collagen or elastin becomes resorbed, all the crossling elements are released into blood, and they concentrate in urine. Assessment of these elements in the body fluids can be used as an indicator of the disintegration kinetics of both tissues. Practically in all long-living tissues of the organism, a cascade of non-enzymatic chemical reactions between reducing sugars and free amino-groups generates the so-called AGE-derivatives. This family of substances, represented by pentosidine, acts in the body exclusively negatively. Their determination in tissues and in body fluids represents important markers in the clinical investigation of various diseases. The possible mechanisms of the enzymatically and non-enzymatically formed crosslinks are discussed, and the relation of AGE-derivatives to various diagnostical findings is mentioned.
Age, sunlight, and facial skin: a histologic and quantitative study.
Quantitative methods were developed to assess the interrelation between age and sunlight on the facial skin of healthy women living in the same sunny area. The women were grouped into the following categories: young versus old and low versus high solar exposure. The features evaluated were perceived age, amount of facial wrinkling, skin color, and skin elasticity. A punch biopsy specimen of cheek skin was obtained and prepared histologically for evaluation of solar elastosis. The histologic examination was complemented by quantification of collagen and elastin by computer-assessed image analysis. Perceived age was estimated by untrained women viewing high quality photographs. As expected, those with greater sun exposure looked older and had more wrinkles, more severe elastosis, increased elastin, and decreased collagen.
Research and Development, SkinMedica, Inc., Carlsbad, California, USA.
Growth factors play an important role in reversing the effects of skin aging mediated by chronological and environmental factors. Excessive oxidation of intra- and extracellular components result in breakdown of collagen and elastin network in the dermis and produce the effect of facial aging. Topical application of human growth factors in multiple clinical studies has been shown to reduce the signs and symptoms of skin aging, including statically significant reduction in fine lines and wrinkles and increase in dermal collagen synthesis. More double-blind and controlled studies are needed to confirm the preliminary clinical effects of growth factor products, and more controls on product quality and stability need to be established.
In the nineteenth century, prior to the introduction of the cuff sphygmomanometer, arteriosclerosis (stiffening of arteries) was recognized by clinicians and by life insurance companies as an indicator of vascular aging and cardiovascular risk, even in asymptomatic individuals. Through the twentieth century, views on aging came to focus on values of systolic and diastolic pressure and on obstructive atherosclerotic disease. Such focus deflected attention from the primary aging change which occurs in all societies, and is represented by stiffening and dilation of the proximal aorta. This review emphasizes the cushioning function of elastic arteries - principally the aorta - and how in youth this results in optimal interaction with the heart, and optimal steady flow through peripheral resistance vessels. Aortic stiffening with age is principally due to fatigue and fracture of elastin lamellae, with transfer of stress to stiffer collagenous components. Stiffening increases left ventricular load and myocardial blood requirement, but limits the capacity for blood supply during diastole. Consequences are cardiac failure and predisposition to ischaemia. The second, under-appreciated effect of aortic stiffening is transmission of flow pulsations downstream into vasodilated organs, principally brain and kidney, where pulsatile energy is dissipated and fragile microvessels are damaged. This accounts for micro infarcts and microhaemorrhages, with specialized cell damage, cognitive decline and renal failure. The aging process can be best monitored by change in the arterial pressure wave rather than by reliance on the cuff sphygmomanometer. This reintroduces the approaches by clinicians and life insurance examiners of the nineteenth century, endorses modern treatments for established disease, and holds the promise of detecting premature arterial degeneration, and better applying lifestyle measures and vasoactive medications to modify the aging process.
Aortic diameter, wall stiffness, and wave reflection in systolic hypertension.
Systolic hypertension is associated with increased pulse pressure (PP) and increased risk for adverse cardiovascular outcomes. However the pathogenesis of increased PP remains controversial. One hypothesis suggests that aortic dilatation, wall stiffening and increased pulse wave velocity result from elastin fragmentation, leading to a premature reflected pressure wave that contributes to elevated PP. An alternative hypothesis suggests that increased proximal aortic stiffness and reduced aortic diameter leads to mismatch between pressure and flow, giving rise to an increased forward pressure wave and increased PP. To evaluate these two hypotheses, we measured pulsatile hemodynamics and proximal aortic diameter directly using tonometry, ultrasound imaging, and Doppler in 167 individuals with systolic hypertension. Antihypertensive medications were withdrawn for at least 1 week before study. Patients with PP above the median (75 mm Hg) had lower aortic diameter (2.94+/-0.36 versus 3.13+/-0.28 cm, P&lt;0.001) and higher aortic wall stiffness (elastance-wall stiffness product: 16.1+/-0.7 versus 15.7+/-0.7 ln[dyne/cm], P&lt;0.001) with no difference in augmentation index (19.9+/-10.4 versus 17.5+/-10.0%, P=0.12). Aortic diameter and wall stiffness both increased with advancing age (P&lt;0.001). However, an inverse relation between PP and aortic diameter remained significant (P&lt;0.001) in models that adjusted for age, sex, height, and weight and then further adjusted for aortic wall stiffness, augmentation index, and mean arterial pressure. Among individuals with systolic hypertension, increased PP is primarily attributable to increased wall stiffness and reduced aortic diameter rather than premature wave reflection.
Pathogenesis of elevated peripheral pulse pressure: some reflections and thinking forward.
Pathogenesis of elevated peripheral pulse pressure: some reflections and thinking forward.
The Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome (progeria) is a rare disorder in childhood characterized by premature and accelerated aging. This study reports the effect of a potent growth factor, EGF, on the proliferative capacities and extracellular matrix macromolecules and collagenase expression of two strains of progeria skin-derived cells. At low population doubling levels (PDL less than 10), confluent cultures of progeria fibroblasts made quiescent by lowering the concentration of serum in the medium did not respond to EGF while the mitotic activity of normal PDL-matched fibroblasts was almost maximally restored upon addition of EGF. No obvious difference between normal and low PDL progeria fibroblasts was observed in the number and in the affinity of the receptors measured by [125I]EGF binding. The synthesis of collagen and non-collagen proteins was similar in normal and affected cells at low and high serum concentration and both types of cells responded to EGF by a specific inhibition of collagen synthesis. Besides a normal level of mRNA coding for type I and type III collagens, collagenase and laminin, progeria fibroblasts expressed a high level of elastin and type IV collagen mRNA. Like normal fibroblasts, progeria cells responded to EGF by a decrease in the level of mRNA for fibrillar collagens and elastin. In contrast, a complete lack of response to EGF was observed for collagenase mRNA whereas the expression of this enzyme was strikingly induced by EGF in normal PDL-matched cells. The abnormal expression of type IV collagen was not significantly modified by EGF. At PDL greater than 10, progeria cells exhibited features of senescence. A significant reduction of collagen synthesis was observed and no further inhibition by EGF was recorded.
A long-term moderate magnesium-deficient diet aggravates cardiovascular risks associated with aging and increases mortality in rats.
EA3921 Metabolic and cellular optimisation, Université de Franche-Comté, UFR Sciences Médicales et Pharmaceutiques, Besançon, France.
The present study aimed to show whether long-term moderate magnesium (Mg)-deficient (150 mg/kg) and Mg-supplemented (3200 mg/kg) diets (versus control diet: 800 mg/kg), modified the occurrence of cardiovascular risk induced by aging in the rat.
Cardiovascular and arterial functions were determined by a systemic hemodynamic study and by ex vivo measurements of vasoconstriction and endothelium dependent-vasorelaxation. Arterial wall structure was determined using pressure myograph chamber and histomorphometric methods.
The main changes observed in old rats (96 weeks old) fed a control diet, in comparison to adult rats (16 weeks old) were increased pulse pressure, a loss of aortic endothelium-dependent relaxation, increased aortic wall thickness and a decrease of the aortic wall elastin/collagen ratio. Long-term moderate Mg deficiency progressively increased systolic blood pressure. Intra-arterial pulse pressure was higher in Mg-deficient old rats than in age-matched control rats. Histological examination showed that Mg deficiency increased the age-induced deleterious effects on composition and structure of aorta (media thickness, increased collagen content and reduction in the elastin/collagen ratio), which lead to large artery rigidity. Hypertension and increased pulse pressure may have contributed to the increase in the mortality rate observed in the hypertensive Mg-deficient group. Although the long-term Mg-supplemented diet lowered blood pressure and decreased the mortality rate, it had no significant effect on aortic wall thickening and stiffening.
It is suggested that a long-term and moderate Mg-deficient diet increases age-induced arterial thickness and stiffness in rats, and thus increases the cardiovascular risks incurred by aging.
[Structural and biochemical alterations of human diabetic dermis studied by H-lysine incorporation and microscopy].
The alteration of the structural organization of dermal connective tissue was studied by light and electron microscopy and by biochemical techniques in normal human and in diabetic patients using skin biopsies. Part of the tissue was used for light and electron microscopy, the rest was incubated in the presence of 3H-lysine for four hours. The 3H-lysine labelled biopsies were submitted to a sequential extraction procedure in order to obtain representative macromolecular fractions containing the matrix macromolecules. The extracts were analyzed for their chemical composition and radioactivity. Electron microscopy revealed ultrastructural modifications of the fibroblasts, of the collagen and elastic fibers in the diabetic dermis. Fibroblasts contained an increased amount of electron dense deposits in the cytoplasm and dilated endoplasmic reticulum. The collagen bundles were dissociated. Elastic fibers under the epithelial basal laminae were fragmented or absent. The incorporation pattern of 3H-lysine into these macromolecular fractions was different in the normal and diabetic skin biopsies. The percentage of total radioactivity incorporated increased significantly in the 1M CaCl2 extractable fraction an in the 6M urea extractable fraction and decreased significantly in the collagenase and elastase extracts in diabetic skin biopsy. These results demonstrate the existence of morphological and biochemical alterations in diabetic connective tissue (dermis) reflecting alterations in the relative rates of synthesis and/or degradation of the intercellular matrix macromolecules as well as of their microarchitectural arrangement.
Diabetes in Children and Teens - MedlinePlus Health Information
Elastin, the main component of elastic fibers, is synthesized only in early life and provides the blood vessels with their elastic properties. With aging, elastin is progressively degraded, leading to arterial enlargement, stiffening, and dysfunction. Also, elastin is a key regulator of vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration during development since heterozygous mutations in its gene (Eln) are responsible for a severe obstructive vascular disease, supravalvular aortic stenosis, isolated or associated to Williams syndrome. Here, we have studied whether early elastin synthesis could also influence the aging processes, by comparing the structure and function of ascending aorta from 6- and 24-month-old Eln+/- and Eln+/+ mice. Eln+/- animals have high blood pressure and arteries with smaller diameters and more rigid walls containing additional although thinner elastic lamellas. Nevertheless, longevity of these animals is unaffected. In young adult Eln+/- mice, some features resemble vascular aging of wild-type animals: cardiac hypertrophy, loss of elasticity of the arterial wall through enhanced fragmentation of the elastic fibers, and extracellular matrix accumulation in the aortic wall, in particular in the intima. In Eln+/- animals, we also observed an age-dependent alteration of endothelial vasorelaxant function. On the contrary, Eln+/- mice were protected from several classical consequences of aging visible in aged Eln+/+ mice, such as arterial wall thickening and alteration of alpha(1)-adrenoceptor-mediated vasoconstriction. Our results suggest that early elastin expression and organization modify arterial aging through their impact on both vascular cell physiology and structure and mechanics of blood vessels.
The postponement of the most frequent age-related diseases stimulated speculations of the possibility of "dying of old age". The selective decline of individual physiological functions-aging in spare-parts-indicates however the potential limitation of the life-span by the rapid decline of some of the vital parameters. We explored a possibility of such a limitation of maximal life-span by the age-related alteration of elastin, consisting in Ca-accumulation, lipid deposition and elastolytic degradation. The quantitative evaluation of these processes suggests an approximative upper limit for the elastic properties of the cardio-respiratory system of about 100-120 years, at least, as far as elastin is involved. This process, age-related alterations of elastic fibers, is however not the only one limiting the functional value of the cardiovascular system. Crosslinking of collagen fibers by advanced glycation end-products certainly contributes also to the age-dependent rigidification of the cardiovascular system. Therefore the answer to the initial question, can age-dependent alterations of a single matrix macromolecule be limiting such vital functions as the cardio-respiratory system-is a cautious yes, with however the caveat that other, independent mechanisms, such as the Maillard reaction, can also interfere with and limit further the functional value of such vital physiological functions.
Surgical anatomy of the lower face: the premasseter space, the jowl, and the labiomandibular fold.
The anatomic basis for the jowl has not been fully described. A formal analysis was performed of the sub-superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS) areolar tissue layer, which overlies the lower part of the masseter. For this research, facial dissections were performed on 16 fresh cadavers ages 12 to 89 years, and detailed anatomic observations were made during the course of several hundred rhytidectomy procedures. Tissue samples from varying age groups were examined histologically. The areolar cleavage plane overlying the lower masseter has specific boundaries and is a true space named the "premasseter space." This space is rhomboidal in shape, lined by membrane, and reinforced by retaining ligaments. The masseter fascia lines the floor, and branches of the facial nerve pass under its deep surface. Histologically, the floor is formed by a thin layer of dense connective tissue, which undergoes minor deterioration in architectural arrangement with age. The roof, lined by a thin transparent and adherent membrane on the underside of the platysma, has a less dense collagen network and contains more elastin. With age, there is a significant reduction in the collagen density of the roof. Expansion of the space with aging, secondary to weakness of the anterior and inferior boundaries, results in formation of the jowl. Medial to the premasseter space is the buccal fat in the masticator space, which descends with aging and contributes to the labiomandibular fold and jowl. Application of the premasseter space in surgery provides significant benefits. The SMAS incision should be forward of the traditional preauricular location to be over the space, not behind. Because the space is a naturally occurring cleavage plane, dissection is bloodless and safe, as all facial nerve branches are outside. The premasseter space should be considered as the preferred dissection plane for lower (cervicofacial) facelifts.
Mandible/innervation
Departments of Pathology and Molecular Medicine and Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Wellington South, New Zealand. wstehbens@wnmeds.ac.nz
This histological study of endocardial thickening in human hearts revealed that as in adult hearts, the proliferation in fetal, neonatal, and infant hearts consisted of collagen, elastin, and smooth muscle cells. Variation in severity from chamber to chamber and site to site indicated that severity is not an aging phenomenon and that predominantly local blood flow conditions determine localization and progression of proliferation. The similarity to endocardial thickening of cardiac valves and to intimal proliferation in blood vessels was remarkable. In old age and in chronic rheumatic heart disease the proliferation exhibited hyalinization, cell depletion, loss and fragmentation of elastin, lipid accumulation, and thrombosis, indicative of a similar pathogenesis to atherosclerotic changes in valvular endocardium and blood vessels. It was concluded that these chronic hemodynamically induced degenerative changes in the endocardium, including cardiac valves, should be classified as endocardial atherosclerosis analogous to that in arteries and veins and that severity is aggravated by high blood pressure, cardiac malformations, and dysfunction or damage caused by other disease processes.
Aged, 80 and over
Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany.
Morphological changes in the dermal collagen and elastin fibre network are characteristic for skin ageing and for pathological skin conditions of the dermis.
To characterize pathological and physiological conditions by multiphoton laser scanning tomography (MLT) in vivo, it is necessary to investigate and identify morphological alterations related to ageing.
In vivo MLT was used to image two-photon excited autofluorescence (AF) and second harmonics generation (SHG) in human dermis of 18 volunteers of different ages. Criteria for the evaluation of age-dependent morphological changes in MLT images were fibre tension and morphology, network pattern, clot formation and image homogeneity. These criteria were weighted and a score was calculated.
The resulting MLT-based Dermis Morphology Score is correlated with age (R2 = -0.90) and with the previously published SHG to AF Ageing Index of Dermis (R2 = 0.66). The two groups of young (age 21-38) and old (age 66-84) volunteers showed a significant difference in MLT score values (P &lt; 0.001). Conclusions: We could demonstrate an in vivo relationship between morphological characteristics of human dermis assessed by MLT and age. The present score allows the semi-quantitative evaluation of specific morphological changes of the dermal fibre network in ageing skin by in vivo AF and SHG imaging. This method will be useful for diagnostics of pathological conditions and their differentiation from ageing effects.
Aged, 80 and over
Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Management, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, USA. prithviraj@fuse.net
This review article describes anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology and treatment of intervertebral disc. The intervertebral discs lie between the vertebral bodies, linking them together. The components of the disc are nucleus pulposus, annulus fibrosus and cartilagenous end-plates. The blood supply to the disc is only to the cartilagenous end-plates. The nerve supply is basically through the sinovertebral nerve. Biochemically, the important constituents of the disc are collagen fibers, elastin fibers and aggrecan. As the disc ages, degeneration occurs, osmotic pressure is lost in the nucleus, dehydration occurs, and the disc loses its height. During these changes, nociceptive nuclear material tracks and leaks through the outer rim of the annulus. This is the main source of discogenic pain. While this is occurring, the degenerative disc, having lost its height, effects the structures close by, such as ligamentum flavum, facet joints, and the shape of the neural foramina. This is the main cause of spinal stenosis and radicular pain due to the disc degeneration in the aged populations. Diagnosis is done by a strict protocol and treatment options are described in this review. The rationale for new therapies are to substitute the biochemical constituents, or augment nucleus pulposus or regenerate cartilaginous end-plate or finally artificial disc implantation..
Pathomechanism of loss of elasticity and hypertrophy of lumbar ligamentum flavum in elderly patients with lumbar spinal canal stenosis.
A histologic, biologic, and immunohistochemical assessment using human samples of lumbar ligamentum flavum.
To clarify the pathomechanism of loss of elasticity and hypertrophy of the lumbar ligamentum flavum (LF) in the elderly population.
The most common spinal disorder in elderly patients is lumbar spinal canal stenosis, causing low back and leg pain, and paresis. Canal narrowing, in part, results from hypertrophy of the LF. Although histologic and biologic literature on this topic is available, the pathomechanism of loss of elasticity and hypertrophy of the LF is still unknown.
One fetus, 5 young, and 5 elderly LF were obtained for histologic study. Hematoxylin and eosin, Alcian blue, Masson Trichrome, and Elastica Van Gieson stains were performed for each LF. Nine LF were collected and were used for biologic study of real time RT-PCR to quantitatively measure mRNA expression of Type I collagen and elastin in each LF.
In the LF of the fetus, elastic fibers accounted for about 75% of the entire area. In the dural aspect of the LF in the young and elderly group, the ratio was also around 75%; however, the ratio of the dorsal aspect decreased with age. Almost half of the area showing loss of elastic fibers was shown to be converted to cartilaginous tissue producing Type II collagen and proteoglycan by Alcian blue and Type II collagen immunohistochemistry. The area, which did not stain black with EV nor blue with AB stain, was positively stained blue with T stain, indicating scarring. The area of the normal dural layer was 18.0 +/- 2.3 and 33.8 +/- 4.3 (mm2), for young and elderly group, respectively. Accordingly, it was 3.2 +/- 0.8 and 18.0 +/- 10.2 (mm2), for the dorsal abnormal layer. Elastin mRNA showed a relatively strong correlation (r = 0.44) with age; however, the slope was very gentle. Type I collagen mRNA showed a very strong correlation (r = 0.80) with age. The slope was steeper, and the value reached at 1000% (10-fold) around 65 years old when compared with the LF from younger patient. Elastin mRNA showed a weak correlation (r = 0.36) with thickness, and the slope was gentle. Type I collagen mRNA showed relatively strong correlation (r = 0.52) with thickness. The slope was steeper, and the line reached at 1000% (10-fold) around 6.5 (mm) when compared with a thin LF.
Decreased elasticity of LF in the elderly is due to the loss of elastic fibers and a concomitant increase of collagenous fibers in the dorsal aspect. LF hypertrophy could be due to the thickening of the normal elastic layer as well as of the abnormal collagenous layer.
Macrophage elastase (MMP-12) is a member of the family of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and is active against multiple extracellular protein substrates such as elastin. Its effect on elastin is central to emphysema in the lung and photoaging of skin. Its expression in the skin increases on photodamaged skin and upon aging. Detecting and characterizing peptides cleaved in elastin, therefore, helps to understand such degradative disease processes in the skin and is also needed to assist in the rational design of agents that specifically inhibit the degradation. In this study, cleavage sites of MMP-12 in human skin elastin were extensively investigated. The peptides formed as a result of cleavages by this enzyme in the human skin elastin were characterized using mass spectrometry. A total of 41 peptides ranging from 4 to 41 amino acids were identified and 36 cleavage sites were determined. Amino acids encoded by exons 5, 6, 26, 28-31 were particularly susceptible to cleavages by MMP-12 and none or very few cleavages were detected from domains encoded by the remaining exons. The amino acid preferences of the different subsites on the catalytic domain of MMP-12 were analyzed.
Percutaneous collagen induction therapy: an alternative treatment for scars, wrinkles, and skin laxity.
Fernandes D
Klinik für Plastische, Hand- und Wiederherstellungschirurgie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany. aust_matthias@gmx.de
Skin laxity, rhytides, and photoaging are generally treated by ablative procedures that injure or destroy the epidermis and its basement membrane, at least in the beginning, and subsequently lead to fibrosis of the papillary dermis. The ideal treatment would be to preserve the epidermis and promote normal collagen and elastin formation in the dermis. Percutaneous collagen induction takes us closer to this ideal.
The authors performed a retrospective analysis of 480 patients in South Africa and Germany with fine wrinkles, lax skin, scarring, and stretch marks treated with percutaneous collagen induction using the Medical Roll-CIT to produce tighter, smoother skin. Most patients had only one treatment, but some have had as many as four treatments. Patients were prepared with topical vitamin A and C cosmetic creams for a minimum of 4 weeks preoperatively.
On average, patients in Germany rated their improvement between 60 and 80 percent better than before the treatment. Histologic examination was carried out in 20 patients and showed a considerable increase in collagen and elastin deposition at 6 months postoperatively. The epidermis demonstrated 40 percent thickening of stratum spinosum and normal rete ridges at 1 year postoperatively.
Percutaneous collagen induction was started in 1997 and has proved to be a simple and fast method for safely treating wrinkles and scars. As opposed to ablative laser treatments, the epidermis remains intact and is not damaged. For this reason, the procedure can be repeated safely and is also suited to regions where laser treatments and deep peels cannot be performed.
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
Skin rejuvenation in Asian skin: the analysis of clinical effects and basic mechanisms of intense pulsed light.
Skin aging consists of photoaging and intrinsic aging. It is characterized clinically not only by rhytides, but also by pigmentary alterations and facial telangiectasias. There continues to be a growing interest in the efficacy of intense pulsed light (IPL) devices in the treatment of skin aging, as well as further defining its mechanism of action.
The objective of this clinical trial was to evaluate the effects and the mechanism of action of an IPL by comparing clinical photographs and biopsy results before and after treatment.
A total of 58 patients were treated using a new IPL device. Clinical photographs were taken before treatment and compared to those taken 3 weeks after the treatment. Also, 4 cases had pathological analyses of tissues that were stained by haematoxylin-eosin and Uana orcein. Immunohistology of human collagen of types 1 and 3 and quantitative analyses of elastin and collagen were performed by a poly-functional digital image light microscope; a transmission electron microscope was used for 2 of the cases to look for additional changes.
After 3 treatments, 62.1% of the patients showed improvement in wrinkles and skin texture. Pigmentation improved in 84.6% of the patients, and a reduction in telangiectasis was seen in 81.25% of the patients. Pathological examination showed that both type 1 and type 3 collagens increased following treatment, but elastin content decreased; however, the elastin fibers were arranged more neatly. In the transmission electron microscope study, the amount of fibroblast activity increased, the fibroblasts were more active, and there were more collagen fibers neatly rearranged within the stroma.
Clinical and pathological studies demonstrated that the IPL was effective in improving wrinkles and skin texture. The mechanism of action may be through the increasing activity of the fibroblasts, hyperplasia of the fibroblasts, and rearrangement of both collagen and elastin within the stroma.
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
The role of elastin and collagen in cutaneous aging: intrinsic aging versus photoexposure.
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Cutaneous aging occurs through 2 biologically distinct processes: intrinsic and extrinsic aging. The first is a naturally occurring process that results from slow tissue degeneration. In human dermis, intrinsic aging is characterized by 3 features: atrophy of the dermis due to loss of collagen, degeneration in the elastic fiber network, and loss of hydration. In contrast to intrinsic aging, extrinsic aging is due to environmental factors. Since ultraviolet (UV) exposure is the principal cause of extrinsic aging, it is often referred to as photoaging. At the microscopic level, the distinguishing feature of photoaging is a massive accumulation of elastotic material in the upper and middle dermis, a process termed solar elastosis. Using recombinant DNA technology, it has become possible to demonstrate that UV radiation can activate the human elastin promoter. This provides a mechanism for enhanced elastin biosynthesis, which contributes to the clinical and morphologic changes observed in photoaged skin.
It is now recognized that both ultraviolet (UV)-A and UVB wavelengths participate in the generation of photodamaged human skin during sun exposure. During usual daily activities, an appropriate protection against solar UV exposure should prevent clinical, cellular, and molecular changes potentially leading to photoaging.
This study was designed to evaluate in human beings the protection afforded by a day cream containing a photostable combination of UVB and UVA filters and thus protect against the UV-induced skin alterations.
In solar-simulated radiation exposed and unprotected skin sites we observed melanization. The epidermis revealed a significant increase in stratum corneum and stratum granulosum thickness. In the dermis, an enhanced expression of tenascin and a reduced expression of type I procollagen were evidenced just below the dermoepidermal junction. Although no change in elastic fibers in exposed buttock skin was seen, a slightly increased deposit of lysozyme and alpha-1 antitrypsin on elastin fibers was observed using immunofluorescence techniques. A day cream with photoprotection properties was shown to prevent all of the above-described alterations.
This study was performed on a limited number of patients (n = 12) with specific characteristics (20-35 years old and skin type II and III). Two dermal alterations were evaluated by visual assessment and not by computer-assisted image analysis quantification.
Randomized Controlled Trial
See the articles recommended by F1000Prime's Faculty of more than 5,000 expert scientists and clinical researchers. - Faculty of 1000
Genetics of arterial structure and function: towards new biomarkers for aortic stiffness?
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death worldwide and premature arterial stiffening is a key contributor to this risk. A large body of evidence now points to arterial stiffness as an independent predictor of cardiovascular events. Stiffness can be assessed by a number of indices and is itself affected by factors including mean arterial pressure, vascular smooth muscle tone and structural elements in the vessel wall, such as elastin and collagen. In addition, aging, hypertension, diabetes and hypercholesterolaemia all exacerbate the stiffening process. Stiffness is highly heritable but, despite a clear genetic basis, the precise molecular pathways regulating stiffness are poorly understood. The present review provides an overview of the current literature and examines the evidence that links genetic factors to arterial wall properties. Although the findings support stiffness as a complex genetic trait, the precise nature of the genes contributing to this are still largely unknown. There are a number of candidate genes and many of these could potentially affect the structure and function of the arterial wall. Indeed, it is likely that genes involving signalling pathways and control of the vessel wall matrix will be as important as those involved in the renin-angiotensin system, adrenergic and other vasoactive systems. Identifying the genes involved is important, since it may suggest new biomarkers as well as provide novel drug targets to reduce arterial stiffness. Current pharmacological intervention is simply to reduce blood pressure, but there are emerging therapies; for example, targeted at breaking collagen cross-links or preventing their formation, which are promising new strategies to reduce arterial stiffness and its associated cardiovascular risk.
Portland Press
We have been concerned in the first section of this review with those diseases that are aging processes, or appear to be so. Some of these (e.g., cardiovascular, pulmonary, neoplasia) cause the death of a large proportion of animals, while others (e.g., osteoporosis, amyloidosis), though clearly progressive with age, are nonfatal. Many diverse factors influence the normal process of aging. Restriction of dietary caloric intake prolongs  lifespan and decreases the incidence and severity of diseases associated with aging, probably by depressing anterior pituitary gland function...
Valve proteoglycan content and glycosaminoglycan fine structure are unique to microstructure, mechanical load and age: Relevance to an age-specific tissue-engineered heart valve.
Grande-Allen KJ
This study characterized valve proteoglycan and glycosaminoglycan composition during development and aging. This knowledge is important for the development of age-specific tissue-engineered heart valves as well as treatments for age-specific valvulopathies. Aortic valves and mitral valves from first-third trimester, 6-week, 6-month and 6-year-old pigs were examined using immunohistochemistry for versican, biglycan, decorin and hyaluronan, as well as elastin and fibrillin. The fine structure of glycosaminoglycans was examined by fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis. Decorin expression was strongest in the 6-year-old valves, particularly in the aortic valve spongiosa. The quantity of iduronate was also highest in the 6-year-old valves. The central tensile-loading region of the anterior mitral leaflet demonstrated reduced glycosaminoglycan content, chain length and hydration and a larger fraction of 4-sulfated iduronate and lower fraction of 6-sulfation. With age, the anterior leaflet center showed a further increase in 4-sulfated iduronate and decrease in 6-sulfation. In contrast, the anterior leaflet free edge showed decreased iduronate and 4-sulfated glucuronate content with age. The young aortic valve was similar to the mitral valve free edge with a higher concentration of glycosaminoglycans and 6-rather than 4-sulfation, but aged to resemble the mitral anterior leaflet center, with an increase in 4-sulfated iduronate content and a decrease in the 6-sulfation fraction. Elastin and fibrillin often co-localized with the proteoglycans studied, but elastin co-localized most specifically with versican. In conclusion, composition and fine structure changes in valve proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans with age are complex and distinct within valve type, histological layers and regions of different mechanical loading.
Biorejuvenation: theory and practice.
The aim of mesotherapy for skin rejuvenation is to increase the biosynthetic capacity of fibroblasts, inducing the reconstruction of an optimal physiologic environment, the enhancement of cell activity, and the synthesis of collagen, elastin, and hyaluronic acid. The desired final effect is a firm, bright, and moisturized skin, and the injection in the superficial dermis of suitable products--perfectly biocompatible and totally absorbable--can achieve these results. In addition to a daily sunscreen application and nonsmoking, mesotherapy is another antiaging strategy helping to maintain a globally firm and bright skin, protecting it from the environmental contributors to aging.
Potential protective effect of fresh grown unicellular green algae component (resilient factor) against PMA- and UVB-induced MMP1 expression in skin fibroblasts.
Department of Pharmacy, Chia-Nan University of Pharmacy and Science, 60 Erh-Jen Road, Sec.1, Pao-An, Jen-Te Hsiang, Tainan, 717, Taiwan ROC. meifenshih@mail.chna.edu.tw
Solar UV radiation damages human skin, affecting skin tone and resiliency, and leading to premature ageing (photoageing). Skin damage by oxidants may lead to activation of PKC, thus increasing matrix metalloproteinase (MMPs) expression and collagen degradation. Administration of Chlorella has been shown to play some biochemical functions as well as in vitro inhibition of MMP1 activity. MMP1 secretion was evaluated following PMA treatment or UVB irradiation in the presence of Resilient Factor (RF, aqueous extract fraction of Chlorella), vitamin C, or vitamin E in human skin fibroblasts. Expression levels of MMP1 and elastin protein and of MMP1, TIMP1, and pro-collagen mRNA were also investigated. PMA-induced MMP1 production, protein, and gene expression were suppressed in the presence of RF. Elastin protein diminished after UVB exposure and RF treatment appeared able to counteract the effect of UVB irradiation. Our results also suggest that RF may increase pro-collagen mRNA expression following UVB exposure. This study shows that application of RF prevents MMP1 production via the inhibition of protein and gene expression. In addition, RF prevents the UVB-suppressed elastin protein and pro-collagen gene expression. These findings indicate that RF may exert a protective effect against UVB irradiation-induced damage in the skin.
The anti-aging effects of Areca catechu L extract (CC-516) on skin were investigate both in vitro and in vivo. The CC-516 has a high proportion of proline (13%) of free amino acid content. The inhibitory effect of CC-516 on the elastase exhibited 37 to 90% inhibition by 10 to 250 mug/ml concentration; the IC _ 50 values with 40.8 mug/ml for porcine pancreatic elastase (PPE) and 48.1 mug/ml for human leukocyte elastase (HLE), respectively. One of the effects of elastase is that it is known to reduce the number of elastin fibers at the level of the enzyme deposition. The number of elastin fibers was increased when we drift from the deposit number of elastase with 100 mg/ml of CC-516. CC-516 showed protection of elastic fiber against degradation by the enzyme in an ex vivo assay. The CC-516 increased proliferation of human fibroblast cell by 85% at 10 ; -4 concentration, compared with control, whereas the increase by ascorbic acid was 50%. The collagen synthesis was increased by 40% at 10 ; -4% concentration of CC-516. The treatment with CC-516 improved skin hydration, the skin elasticity, and skin wrinkles. From this study, we suggest that CC-516 can be used as a new anti-aging component for cosmetics.
Department of Cosmetology, School of Pharmacy, Medical University of Silesia, Sosnowiec, Poland.
The most dangerous environmental factor for our skin condition is ultraviolet light radiation. Chronic exposition to ultraviolet light can induce epidermal atrophy, keratosis, depigmentation and dysplasia. In the dermis, UV light causes dramatic up-regulation of extracellular matrix-degrading enzymes. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are engaged in collagen, elastin and other extracellular matrix components degradation. In addition, to increase level of destructive enzymes, UV light has been shown to decrease collagen production. As a consequence of UV impact on skin, it shows signs of aging including loss of tone and elasticity, increased skin fragility, blood vessels weakness and wrinkles. The most dangerous effect of UV on skin is an increased risk of melanoma and other skin cancers. Retinoids are well known antiaging agents. For many years this vitamin has been used for the prevention and treatment of photoaging. Retinoids abolish cellular atypia, increase compacting of the stratum corneum and reduce skin hyperpigmentation caused by sun light. Recent evidence suggests that retinoids also play a role in the prevention of aging, because of its inhibitory effects on metalloproteinases expression. The aim of this study was to examine if all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) effects MMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-3 and MMP-14 gene expression in fibroblasts cultured in vitro.
[Elastin and arterial aging].
Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53792-7275, USA.
Normal human vocal fold fibroblast (hVFF) primary cell lines are unavailable commercially and are very difficult to acquire, subsequently little is known about their characteristics. The purpose of this study was to compare the morphological and proliferation characteristics and gene expression of hVFFs from different aged donors.
We developed three normal hVFF primary cell lines from donors aged 21 (21T), 59 (59T) and 79 (79T) years. We characterized their morphological features, proliferative abilities, telomere lengths, and their functional gene expression by quantitative real-time PCR.
The 21T line maintained a typical spindle shape until passage 14 whereas 59T and 79T changed morphology to wider, shorter cells at passage 7. Proliferation rates were constant for the 21T through passage 14; 59T's proliferative half-life was passage 9, whereas 79T maintained lower proliferation rates from passage 4. Gene expression levels for fibronectin, collagen I, collagen VI, procollagen I and elastin demonstrated similar patterns for all lines, however, relative amounts decreased with the age of donor. Telomere lengths did not show differences related with donor age.
hVFF primary cultures have limited proliferative capacity. The morphology, proliferation, differentiation, and gene expression levels of VFF can be affected by age, but senescence patterns were similar across the ages.
The assembly of elastic fibers in tissues that undergo repeated cycles of extension and recoil, such as the lungs and blood vessels, is dependent on the proper interaction and alignment of tropoelastin with a microfibrillar scaffold. Here, we describe in vivo histopathological effects of neuraminidase-1 (Neu1) deficiency on elastin assembly in the lungs and aorta of mice. These mice exhibited a tight-skin phenotype very similar to the Tsk mouse. Normal septation of Neu1-null mice did not occur in neonatal mice, resulting in enlarged alveoli that were maintained in adults. The abnormal development of elastic fibers was remarkable under electron microscopy and confirmed by the overlapping distribution of elastin, fibrillin-1, fibrillin-2, and fibulin-5 (Fib-5) by the light microscopy immunostainings. Fib-5 fibers appeared diffuse and unorganized around the alveolar walls and the apex of developing secondary septal crests. Fibrillin-2 deposition was also abnormal in neonatal and adult lungs. Dispersion of myofibroblasts appeared abnormal in developing lungs of Neu1-null mice, with a random distribution of myofibroblast around the alveolar walls, rather than concentrating at sites of elastin synthesis. The elastic lamellae in the aorta of the Neu1-null mice were thinner and separated by hypertrophic smooth muscle cells that were surrounded by an excess of the sialic acid-containing moieties. The concentration of elastin, as measure by desmosine levels, was significantly reduced in the aorta of Neu1-null mice. Message levels for tropoelastin and Fib-5 were normal, suggesting the elastic fiber defects in Neu1-null mice result from impaired extracellular assembly.
Deregulation of versican and elastin binding protein in solar elastosis.
Several changes in skin appearance including loss of elasticity and wrinkle formation are associated with alterations in the composition of the dermal extracellular matrix. They are induced by intrinsic aging or by environmental factors such as UV light referred to as photoaging. A general characteristic in the histology of photoaged skin is the accumulation of elastotic material suggesting impaired formation and/or massive breakdown of elastic fibres. In order to shed light on some of the underlying mechanisms we tracked two of the major players in elastic fibre formation in different skin conditions: EBP (elastin binding protein), a regulator of elastic fibre assembly and VER (versican), a component of functional elastic fibres as well as non-functional elastotic material. Using quantitative RT-PCR on skin biopsies we found that the expression levels of VER and EBP were unaltered during intrinsic skin aging. Upon acute UV stress however, VER and EBP showed different regulation patterns: VER mRNA increased after 6 h and was further up-regulated until 24 h. The EBP mRNA by contrast was reduced after 6 h but showed massive induction at 24 h after acute UV stress. In chronically sun-exposed skin, VER protein was accumulated similar to elastotic material in the extracellular space, whereas its mRNA level was consistently reduced compared to sun-protected skin. The EBP mRNA by contrast showed slightly increased expression levels in the sun-exposed area compared to its sun-protected counterpart. Based on these data we propose a model which may help to explain parts of the mechanisms leading to the formation of elastotic masses. We further hypothesize that the presence of elastotic material triggers some yet unknown feedback mechanism(s) resulting in altered expression patterns of VER and EBP in chronically sun-exposed skin.
Aged, 80 and over
Advanced glycation end products accumulate in vascular smooth muscle and modify vascular but not ventricular properties in elderly hypertensive canines.
Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are believed to increase left ventricular (LV) and vascular stiffness, in part via cross-linking proteins. We determined whether and where AGEs were increased in elderly hypertensive nondiabetic dogs and whether an AGE cross-link breaker (ALT-711) improved vascular or ventricular function.
Elderly dogs with experimental hypertension (old hypertensives [OH]) were randomized to receive ALT-711 (OH+ALT group; n=11; 1 mg/kg PO) or not (OH group; n=11) for 8 weeks. Conscious blood pressure measurements (weekly), echocardiography (week 8), and anesthetized study (week 8) with LV pressure-volume analysis and aortic pressure-dimension and pressure-flow assessment over a range of preloads and afterloads were performed. In LV and aorta from OH, OH+ALT, and young normal dogs, AGE content (immunohistochemistry and Western analysis for N(epsilon)-(carboxymethyl)lysine [CML]) was assessed. Aortic CML content was markedly increased in OH and OH+ALT dogs compared with young normal dogs. CML was localized to aortic and aortic vasa vasorum smooth muscle but not to collagen or elastin. CML was essentially undetectable in young normal, OH, or OH+ALT myocardium but was visible in large vessels in the LV. ALT-711 therapy was associated with lower blood pressure and pulse pressure, decreased systemic vascular resistance, increased aortic distensibility and arterial compliance, and, notably, significant aortic dilatation. Neither LV systolic nor diastolic function was different in OH+ALT versus OH dogs.
In elderly hypertensive canines, AGE accumulation and AGE cross-link breaker effects were confined to the vasculature without evidence of myocardial accumulation or effects. The lack of AGE accumulation in collagen-rich areas suggests that the striking vascular effects may be mediated by mechanisms other than collagen cross-linking.
Letter by Hartog et al. regarding article, "Advanced glycation end products accumulate in vascular smooth muscle and modify vascular but not ventricular properties in elderly hypertensive canines".
Letter by Hartog et al. regarding article, "Advanced glycation end products accumulate in vascular smooth muscle and modify vascular but not ventricular properties in elderly hypertensive canines".
Lung morphometry and collagen and elastin content: changes during normal development and after prenatal hormone exposure in sheep.
This study examined whether the improvement in lung function after prenatal hormone exposure coincided with changes in lung morphometry or in collagen and elastin content. Fetal lambs received a single intramuscular injection of betamethasone (0.5 mg/kg) plus L-thyroxine (T4) (15 micrograms/kg) or vehicle control 48 h before delivery at 121, 128, or 135 d gestational age (d 121, d 128, d 135, term = 150 d). T4 was administered in conjunction with betamethasone in an attempt to enhance the maturational response. The right-upper lobes were instillation fixed at 30 cm H2O by Karnovsky's fixative after a 40-min period of mechanical ventilation. A number of significant changes occurred between d 121 and d 135 in control animals: alveolar airspace volume increased by 270%; despite a 40% reduction in alveolar septal thickness, alveolar septal volume did not change appreciably, suggesting a "redistribution" of septal tissue into the formation of secondary alveolar septa, which doubled in number; and both parenchymal collagen and elastin volume increased significantly, whereas pleural collagen and elastin volume did not change. In contrast to the changes seen in control animals, exposure to betamethasone plus T4 led to alveolar septal thinning at each gestational age without an associated increase in secondary septal number, a 40% decrease in alveolar septal volume, and a proportionate reduction in parenchymal elastin at d 121. Although attenuation of alveolar septa coincides with redistribution of septal tissue into the formation of secondary septa during normal maturation, exposure to betamethasone plus T4 promotes thinning of alveolar septa in the absence of secondary septal formation, which results in a loss of alveolar septal tissue.
Facial skin treatments with laser resurfacing, dermabrasion, and chemical peels were responsible for a significant portion of the 2.7 million cosmetic procedures performed in 1998. Perioral wrinkles are a common problem for which plastic surgical consultation is obtained. The aim of this study was to compare and quantify the advantages and disadvantages of laser resurfacing versus dermabrasion in the treatment of perioral wrinkles. Twenty female patients provided informed consent and participated in the study. Half of the perioral area was treated with dermabrasion and half was treated with the UltraPulse CO2 laser. The two procedures were compared using high-quality photographs; a biophysical evaluation of skin color, hydration, and mechanical properties; and patient evaluation of outcomes. Photographs were evaluated by 10 board-certified plastic surgeons who were blinded to the treatment methods. The laser treatment had a significantly higher erythema score at 1 month and a small but significantly greater improvement in perioral wrinkles at 6 months. Thirteen subjects selected the laser treatment as producing the best result, despite the greater intraoperative pain for this procedure. Biomechanical measurements suggest that the laser treatment produced a skin state more similar to skin in younger patients, presumably with higher levels and/or greater organization of the collagen and elastin. Patient preference was inferred from the resurfacing method that they would recommend to a friend. Although the laser was selected as the best result in a majority of cases, patient preference was equally distributed between the two treatments. The authors think that by studying and quantifying the biophysical changes that occur as a result of CO2 laser resurfacing, greater improvements in restoring actinic damage (e.g., wrinkles) can be achieved. Patients consider more than the objective skin changes from a resurfacing technique when making a recommendation to a friend.
Randomized Controlled Trial
Electrospun polyglyconate (Maxon) and its blends with proteins such as gelatin and elastin, with a spatially designed layer structure, were prepared as potential scaffolds for vascular tissue engineering. In vitro biodegradation of the electrospun tubular protein/Maxon scaffolds in phosphate buffered saline (pH = 7.3) was studied for the first time. The biodegradation is manifested by uptake of the PBS medium by the hydrophilic proteins and also by the mass loss due to the removal of degraded fragments and uncrosslinked proteins from the matrices. The effect of degradation on the structure-property relations was evaluated by IR, XRD, and DSC analyses of the aged scaffolds. The degradation of amorphous phase of Maxon in the early stages of aging has resulted in an increase in the crystallinity of the polymer. SEM analysis indicated a significant change in nanofiber morphology and fiber-breaking. The mass loss and fiber breaking have negatively impacted the mechanical properties and the effect was maximum at 15-20 days of aging. The scaffold containing low molecular weight buffer soluble elastin revealed relatively better degradation properties compared to that containing high molecular weight buffer insoluble elastin.
Differential expression of lysyl oxidases LOXL1 and LOX during growth and aging suggests specific roles in elastin and collagen fiber remodeling in rat aorta.
The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in vascular tissue structure, maintenance, and function. Lysyl oxidases catalyze a key step in the posttranslational cross-linking of elastin and collagens in the ECM. Gene knockout studies in mice suggested a role for lysyl oxidase-like (LOXL1) in adult elastin synthesis and a role for its isoform, lysyl oxidase (LOX), in the synthesis of both collagens and elastin during development. However, the relative expression of both isoforms as a function of age is not known and was therefore investigated here. LOX and LOXL1 immunohistochemistry and real-time RT-PCR were performed during development, growth and aging in the aorta of LOU and Brown-Norway (BN) rats, two inbred strains with different susceptibilities to arterial fragility. In addition, expression of genes encoding for elastic fiber proteins and type I collagen, together with elastin and collagen contents, was measured in adult and old rat aortas. High aortic LOX expression was observed early in the development (embryonic day 15), followed by a drastic reduction in adulthood, whereas LOXL1 was mainly detectable in the intima and media; its expression was maintained throughout life in the LOU rat. Expression of tropoelastin, type-I collagen, and LOXL1 genes was reduced in the aorta of 6-week-old BN rats. Aging is characterized by a decreased elastin/collagen ratio and a greatly decreased expression of LOX, tropoelastin, and type-I collagen. These findings indicate a different spatial and temporal expression of LOX and LOXL1 during growth and aging in the rat aorta and suggest specific roles for LOX and LOXL1 in the synthesis and remodeling of elastic and collagen fibers.
A review of ageing and an examination of clinical methods in the assessment of ageing skin. Part I: Cellular and molecular perspectives of skin ageing.
The ageing process is noticeable within all organs of the body and manifests itself visibly in the skin. Skin ageing is influenced by several factors including genetics, environmental exposure, hormonal changes and metabolic processes. Together these factors lead to cumulative alterations of skin structure, function and appearance. The functioning of the central nervous, immune, endocrine and cardiovascular systems, as well as the skin is also impaired with age. Chronologically, aged skin is thin, relatively flattened, dry and unblemished, with some loss of elasticity and age-related loss of architectural regularity. General atrophy of the extracellular matrix is reflected by a decrease in the number of fibroblasts. Reduced levels of collagen and elastin, with impaired organization are primarily because of decreased protein synthesis affecting types I and III collagen in the dermis, with an increased breakdown of extracellular matrix proteins. Oxidative stress is considered of primary importance in driving the ageing process. The original free radical theory of ageing purported that the molecular basis of ageing was derived from a lifetime accumulation of oxidative damage to cells resulting from excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced as a consequence of aerobic metabolism. Although the skin possesses extremely efficient anti-oxidant activities, during ageing, ROS levels rise and anti-oxidant activities decline. The ROS are necessary in multiple MAP kinase pathways and the induction of AP-1, in turn, up-regulates expression of matrix-metalloproteinases providing a plausible mechanism for the increased collagen degradation in aged human skin.
Platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha-expressing cells localize to the alveolar entry ring and have characteristics of myofibroblasts during pulmonary alveolar septal formation.
Platelet-derived growth factor-A and its receptor, platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha (PDGF-Ralpha), are required for formation of the secondary pulmonary alveolar septa in mice. However, it remains unclear how these molecules direct the secondary septation process. We have examined the abundance, location, and the accumulation of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alphaSMA), neutral lipid droplets, and elastin in the proximity of PDGF-Ralpha-expressing alveolar cells during postnatal days 4 through 12 in the mouse. PDGF-Ralpha-expressing cells preferentially have characteristics of myofibroblasts and were more likely to contain alphaSMA than are alveolar cells that do not express PDGF-Ralpha. PDGF-Ralpha expressing cells were preferentially located in the alveolar entry ring (AER) where alphaSMA and elastic fibers accumulate. In contrast, PDGF-Ralpha expression inversely correlated with neutral lipid accumulation, which was more prominent at the alveolar base, distant from the AER. PDGF-Ralpha-expressing alveolar cells accumulate in the AER where they may promote mechanical stability during respiration. In addition to defining how alveolar septa form, these findings may have implications for the treatment of diseases which involve alveolar effacement such as emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis.
Heightened aberrant deposition of hard-wearing elastin in conduit arteries of prehypertensive SHR is associated with increased stiffness and inward remodeling.
Elastin is a major component of conduit arteries and a key determinant of vascular viscoelastic properties. Aberrant organization of elastic lamellae has been reported in resistance vessels from spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) before the development of hypertension. Hence, we have characterized the content and organization of elastic lamellae in conduit vessels of neonatal SHR in detail, comparing the carotid arteries from 1-wk-old SHR with those from Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) and Sprague Dawley (SD) rats. The general structure and mechanics were studied by pressure myography, and the internal elastic lamina organization was determined by confocal microscopy. Cyanide bromide-insoluble elastin scaffolds were also prepared from 1-mo-old SHR and WKY aortas to assess their weight, amino acid composition, three-dimensional lamellar organization, and mechanical characteristics. Carotid arteries from 1-wk-old SHR exhibited narrower lumen and greater intrinsic stiffness than those from their WKY and SD counterparts. These aberrations were associated with heightened elastin content and with a striking reduction in the size of the fenestrae present in the elastic lamellae. The elastin scaffolds isolated from SHR aortas also exhibited increased relative weight and stiffness, as well as the presence of peculiar trabeculae inside the fenestra that reduced their size. We suggest that the excessive and aberrant elastin deposited in SHR vessels during perinatal development alters their mechanical properties. Such abnormalities are likely to compromise vessel expansion during a critical period of growth and, at later stages, they could compromise hemodynamic function and participate in the development of systemic hypertension.
The changes induced by ageing of the skin are particularly visible in photo-exposed areas, indicating the interaction between actinic factors and factors specific to the ageing process itself. The corresponding histological signs affect various structures: epidermis (thinning of the epidermis, reduced cell proliferation...), dermis-epidermis junction (disappearance of the microvilli with defective adhesion of the epidermis to the dermis), dermis (degeneration of elastin and collagen, which is photoinduced, and a moth-eaten appearance with loss of microfibrils as a result of time-related ageing), microcirculation (reduced vascularization, particularly visible in photo-exposed areas...) appendages.
Sebaceous Glands/pathology
Sebaceous Glands/physiology
Sweat Glands/anatomy &amp; histology
Sweat Glands/pathology
Diverticulosis of the left colon is an acquired condition that is associated with aging. The diverticula arise at the points of penetration of the circular layer of the muscularis propria by the blood vessels supplying the submucosa and mucosa. They are outpouchings of mucosa invested by wisps of muscularis mucosae, which are believed to result from elevated intraluminal pressure in the left colon, associated with degenerative changes in the collagen and elastin content of the colonic wall. Pathologically, diverticulitis occurs when the mucosa of diverticula becomes inflamed. This may result from obstruction of the diverticulum, for example, by inspissated feces or a fecolith, leading to bacterial overgrowth, gas and toxin production, and mucosal injury. The flat mucosa of the colon between the orifices of the diverticula is also commonly inflamed, with changes of varying severity indistinguishable from those of ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease. Such mucosal changes include a dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, mucin depletion, cryptitis, crypt abscesses, architectural distortion, gland dropout, Paneth cell metaplasia, and ulceration. Complications of diverticulitis include bleeding (the diverticula are in intimate contact with the penetrating blood vessels which may become eroded), ulceration, abscess formation, penetration, perforation, fistulas, stricture formation, and pylephlebitis.
Department of Dermatology and Skin Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. alastair@carruthers.net
As with other facial wrinkles, the gradual loss and disorganization of collagen fibers and elastin, connective tissues that provide underlying support for skin, cause horizontal forehead rhytides in large part.
To develop the Forehead Lines Grading Scale for objective quantification of horizontal forehead rhytides at rest and with expression and to establish the reliability of this photonumeric scale for clinical research and practice.
The Forehead Lines Grading Scale is a 5-point photonumeric rating scale that was developed to objectively quantify resting (static) and hyperkinetic (dynamic) forehead lines. Inter- and intrarater variability was assessed by computing intraclass correlation coefficients.
Klanderman BJ
Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. michael.cho@channing.harvard.edu
The destruction of elastic fibers has been implicated in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Emphysema has been described in autosomal dominant cutis laxa, which can be caused by mutations in the elastin gene. Previously, a rare functional mutation in the terminal exon of elastin was found in a case of severe, early-onset COPD. To test the hypothesis that other similar elastin mutations may predispose to COPD, we screened 90 probands from the Boston Early-Onset COPD Study and 90 smoking control subjects from the Normative Aging Study for mutations in elastin exons using high-resolution DNA melt analysis followed by resequencing. Rare nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) seen only in cases were examined for segregation with airflow obstruction within pedigrees. Common nonsynonymous SNPs were tested for association with COPD in a family-based analysis of 949 subjects from the Boston Early-Onset COPD Study, and in a case-control analysis in 389 COPD cases from the National Emphysema Treatment Trial and 472 control subjects from the Normative Aging Study. Of 28 elastin variants found, 3 were nonsynonymous SNPs found only in cases. The previously described Gly773Asp mutation was found in another proband. The other two SNPs did not clearly segregate with COPD within families. Two common nonsynonymous SNPs did not demonstrate significant associations in either a family-based or case-control analysis. Exonic SNPs in the elastin gene do not appear to be common risk factors for severe COPD.
Modulation of elastin exon 26A mRNA and protein expression in human skin in vivo.
Photoaged skin contains elastotic materials in the upper reticular dermis, a result of a commonly known as solar elastosis. It is known that the primary transcript of elastin undergoes extensive alternative splicing and that this results in the translation of multiple heterogeneous protein isoforms. In this study, we found that UV irradiation and heat treatment increased the levels of elastin transcript containing exon 26A and its encoded elastin isoform in the epidermis of human skin in vivo and in cultured human keratinocytes in vitro. We also found that the elastin transcript containing exon 26A was upregulated in photoaged forearm skin compared with intrinsically aged buttock skin in the same elderly individuals. We observed that topical retinoic acid treatment to human skin did not increase the expression of exon 26A mRNA, but that tropoelastin mRNA expression was increased by this treatment. These findings suggest that the production of the elastin isoform containing exon 26A peptide is increased by UV exposure and heat treatment in human skin in vivo and that it may play an important role in the development of solar elastosis in photoaged human skin.
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
The generation of reactive oxygen species is among the various mechanisms by which ultraviolet radiation damages skin. Tempol, a superoxide dismutase analogue which readily penetrates cell membranes when administered exogenously, has been shown to provide protection against some forms of oxygen-dependent damage. In this study, we measured the ability of Tempol to protect against ultraviolet A- and ultraviolet B-induced damage, using a previously described transgenic mouse model of cutaneous photoaging. The ability of Tempol to prevent ultraviolet radiation-induced elastin promoter activation was determined in vitro. Tempol provided over 50% protection against ultraviolet B and over 70% protection against ultraviolet A as measured in our in vitro system. These results demonstrate the ability of the superoxide dismutase mimic, Tempol, to protect against ultraviolet induced elastin promoter activation. This compound could be a useful pharmacological agent to prevent cutaneous photoaging.
Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
This study was designed to examine the clinical and histologic effects of injection of cultured fibroblasts in hyaluronic acid as a filler material. The advantages, disadvantages, and side effects of the procedure were examined during the study.
Skin biopsies obtained from the backs of 30 Sprague Dawley rats were used in the study. Dermal fibroblasts obtained from these biopsies were cultured for 21 days and, after 3 weeks, autologous labeled cultured fibroblasts of the rats were injected intracutaneously alone and mixed with hyaluronic acid. Injections of culture medium and hyaluronic acid were also performed as control groups. At the end of the fourth and eighth months, skin biopsies were taken from the injection sites and normal skin and examined under light and electron microscopes.
The injected fibroblasts, elastin, and collagen production were analyzed and found to be stable, long-lasting, and well tolerated. No complications were observed.
Cultured human dermal fibroblasts combined with hyaluronic acid can provide a suitable, biocompatible, and long-lasting material and should be regarded as a new method in dermal renovation even beyond their temporary filling effect.
In utero and postnatal exposure to arsenic alters pulmonary structure and function.
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA. lantz@email.arizona.edu
In addition to cancer endpoints, arsenic exposures can also lead to non-cancerous chronic lung disease. Exposures during sensitive developmental time points can contribute to the adult disease. Using a mouse model, in utero and early postnatal exposures to arsenic (100 ppb or less in drinking water) were found to alter airway reactivity to methacholine challenge in 28 day old pups. Removal of mice from arsenic exposure 28 days after birth did not reverse the alterations in sensitivity to methacholine. In addition, adult mice exposed to similar levels of arsenic in drinking water did not show alterations. Therefore, alterations in airway reactivity were irreversible and specific to exposures during lung development. These functional changes correlated with protein and gene expression changes as well as morphological structural changes around the airways. Arsenic increased the whole lung levels of smooth muscle actin in a dose dependent manner. The level of smooth muscle mass around airways was increased with arsenic exposure, especially around airways smaller than 100 microm in diameter. This increase in smooth muscle was associated with alterations in extracellular matrix (collagen, elastin) expression. This model system demonstrates that in utero and postnatal exposure to environmentally relevant levels of arsenic can irreversibly alter pulmonary structure and function in the adults.
Origin of axial prestretch and residual stress in arteries.
The structural protein elastin endows large arteries with unique biological functionality and mechanical integrity, hence its disorganization, fragmentation, or degradation can have important consequences on the progression and treatment of vascular diseases. There is, therefore, a need in arterial mechanics to move from materially uniform, phenomenological, constitutive relations for the wall to those that account for separate contributions of the primary structural constituents: elastin, fibrillar collagens, smooth muscle, and amorphous matrix. In this paper, we employ a recently proposed constrained mixture model of the arterial wall and show that prestretched elastin contributes significantly to both the retraction of arteries that is observed upon transection and the opening angle that follows the introduction of a radial cut in an unloaded segment. We also show that the transmural distributions of elastin and collagen, compressive stiffness of collagen, and smooth muscle tone play complementary roles. Axial prestresses and residual stresses in arteries contribute to the homeostatic state of stress in vivo as well as adaptations to perturbed loads, disease, or injury. Understanding better the development of and changes in wall stress due to individual extracellular matrix constituents thus promises to provide considerable clinically important insight into arterial health and disease.
The wrinkles soothing effect on the middle and lower face by intradermal injection of botulinum toxin type A.
Botulinum toxin type A (BTA) has been used on facial expressive muscles to reduce wrinkles. We assumed that intradermal injection with BTA on the middle and lower face can produce face-lifting and wrinkles-soothing effect by promoting collagen synthesis.
25 U BTA into one-half of the face, and normal saline into the other half as control. Clinical photographs were taken every 4 weeks for 16 weeks, and evaluated by a doctor blinded to the assignments. Patients graded the results of wrinkles elimination on each follow-up. Skin biopsies were taken before the treatment and 8 weeks after the injection. The specimens were assessed by a pathologist using hematoxylin and eosin stain, elastin stain, Masson trichrome stain and immunohistochemical stain with type I procollagen.
By photographic documentation, there was no significant face-lifting effect. However, there was statistical significance in wrinkles reduction on the BTA sides compared to pre-treatment. Subjectively, six subjects noticed better wrinkles soothing effect on the BTA sides. This effect was noted as early as 4 weeks after injection, and lasted for a minimum 8 weeks. The histologic examination revealed slight neocollagen synthesis by Masson trichrome stain on both sides.
Randomized Controlled Trial
Age-dependent changes in the level of antielastin antibodies of different immunoglobulin classes (IgG, IgM, IgA and IgD) in the human serum.
Serum samples from healthy subjects of different ages (within the age range 1-75 years) were tested for the presence of antielastin IgG, IgM, IgA and IgD by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, utilizing insoluble human aortic elastin. All the tested sera showed detectable levels of antielastin antibodies of the four classes with the following regularities in changing their level with age. Antielastin IgG and IgM showed relatively high levels in the serum of children, growing even higher in the serum of subjects 18-20 years old. Then their levels were stabilized in the serum of 30-60 year olds for IgG and of subjects 30-50 years old for IgM and gradually decreased thereafter. The antielastin IgA showed non-significant changes with age up to the age of 40 and then its level gradually increased. The antielastin IgD showed statistically non-significant changes with age and a tendency to decrease after the age of 60.
Mechanistic effects of long-term ultraviolet B irradiation induce epidermal and dermal changes in human skin xenografts.
UVB irradiation has been reported to induce photoaging and suppress systemic immune function that could lead to photocarcinogenesis. However, because of the paucity of an UVB-induced photodamaged skin model, precise and temporal mechanism(s) underlying the deleterious effects of long-term UVB exposure on human skin have yet to be delineated. In this study, we established a model using human skin xenografted onto severe combined immunodeficient mice, which were subsequently challenged by repeated UVB irradiation for 6 weeks. Three-dimensional optical image analysis of skin replicas and noninvasive biophysical measurements illustrated a significant increase in skin surface roughness, similar to premature photoaging, and a significant loss of skin elasticity after long-term UVB exposure. Resembling authentically aged skin, UVB-exposed samples exhibited significant increases in epithelial keratins (K6, K16, K17), elastins, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-1, MMP-9, MMP-12) as well as degradation of collagens (I, IV, VII). The UVB-induced deterioration of fibrous keratin intermediate filaments was also observed in the stratum corneum. Additionally, similarities in gene expression patterns between our model and chronologically aged skin substantiated the plausible relationship between photodamage and chronological age. Furthermore, severe skin photodamage was observed when neutralizing antibodies against TIMP-1, an endogenous inhibitor of MMPs, were administered during the UVB exposure regimen. Taken together, these findings suggest that our skin xenograft model recapitulates premature photoaged skin and provides a comprehensive tool with which to assess the deleterious effects of UVB irradiation.
The translational basis of human cutaneous photoaging: on models, methods, and meaning.
The translational basis of human cutaneous photoaging: on models, methods, and meaning.
Aging skin undergoes progressive degenerative change. Structural and physiologic changes that occur as a natural consequence of intrinsic aging combined with the effects of a lifetime of ongoing cumulative extrinsic damage and environment insult (e.g. overexposure to solar radiation) can produce a marked susceptibility to dermatologic disorders in the elderly. As skin ages, the vasculature progressively atrophies. The supporting dermis also deteriorates, with collagen and elastin fibers becoming sparse and increasingly disordered. These changes leave the elderly increasingly susceptible to both vascular disorders such as stasis dermatitis and skin injuries such as pressure ulcers and skin tears, with a steadily decreasing ability to effect skin repair. A parallel erosion of normal immune function produces higher levels of autoimmune skin disorders such as bullous pemphigoid, benign mucous membrane pemphigoid, paraneoplastic pemphigoid, and pemphigus vulgaris. Lichen sclerosus, an autoimmune disorder often occurring in the genital area in older women, is not common but is an important development because of the potential for substantial discomfort as well as serious complications. The prevalence of polypharmacy in this population increases the risk for autoimmune drug reactions, and diagnosis should be undertaken with an awareness that polypharmacy in this population creates a greatly increased susceptibility to drug eruptions that can mimic other cutaneous disorders. Immunologic senescence in the elderly also sets the stage for potential reactivation of the Varicella zoster virus, in which initial dermatologic involvement expands into the major sensory ganglia. Known as shingles, this disorder can be excruciatingly painful with the potential to cause blindness if the optic nerve becomes involved. Dermatoses such as xerosis, pruritus, and eczema are also widespread in the elderly, create substantial suffering in those afflicted, and often prove recalcitrant to treatment. Individual susceptibility to specific types of contact dermatitis changes over the lifetime, and seborrheic dermatitis is substantially more prevalent in the elderly. It is not uncommon for older patients to have multiple impairments, with the potential for cognitive dysfunction as well as impaired vision, hearing, or mobility. In addition, they may not have adequate housing or nutrition, or the financial resources necessary for adequate compliance. Physicians must take into consideration the patient's physical ability to comply with the recommended therapy as well as socioeconomic factors that may impact on compliance. Simple topical regimens are preferable wherever possible in order to maximize compliance and, therefore, efficacy. Extra effort may be necessary to ensure that instructions are accurately followed and that ongoing compliance with the regimen prescribed is actually achieved. Management of dermatologic disorders in the elderly is often less than optimal, due to the fact that the special needs and limitations of this population are not adequately considered. Treatments should consider the intrinsic differences between younger and older patients that may impact on diagnosis and therapy choice. The aged patient is often afflicted with numerous co-morbidities that can influence the choice of therapy. Skin integrity in the elderly is compromised, and safety concerns are increased with the long-term use of any medication prescribed. In addition, the prevalence of polypharmacy in the aged population substantially increases the risk of cutaneous drug reactions, which can profoundly complicate accurate diagnosis of dermatologic disorders. The aged population also needs to be more closely monitored because of increased fragility of the skin and the physical limitations that may hinder compliance with prescribed regimens.
Aged, 80 and over
Skin atrophy in cytoplasmic SOD-deficient mice and its complete recovery using a vitamin C derivative.
Intrinsic skin ageing is characterized by atrophy and loss of elasticity. Although the skin hypertrophy induced by photoageing has been studied, the molecular mechanisms of skin atrophy during ageing remain unclear. Here, we report that copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (CuZn-SOD)-deficient mice show atrophic morphology in their skin. This atrophy is accompanied by the degeneration of collagen and elastic fibers, and skin hydroxyproline is also significantly reduced in deficient mice. These imply that the dysfunction of collagen and elastin biosynthesis are involved in the progression of skin thinning. Furthermore, transdermal administration of a vitamin C derivative which can permeate through the membrane, completely reversed the skin thinning and deterioration of collagen and elastin in the mutant mice. These indicate that the vitamin C derivative is a powerful agent for alleviating skin ageing through regeneration of collagen and elastin. The CuZn-SOD-deficient mice might be applicable to evaluation of therapeutic medicines against skin ageing.
Elastase digestion of normal and pseudoxanthoma elasticum lesional skin elastins.
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a heritable disorder of connective tissue that is characterized by redundant folds of skin in flexural areas. There is considerable evidence that suggests that the elastic fiber is the main site of the abnormality although the primary molecular defect has not been identified. The aim of this study was to identify differences between PXE and normal skin elastins. Elastins from normal, nonsolar-exposed skin, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum lesional skin were purified and their solubilization by pancreatic elastase was compared. Results demonstrated that elastin derived from normal skin was more susceptible to proteolytic cleavage than elastin purified from either pseudoxanthoma elasticum lesional skin or ligamentum nuchae. Pretreatment of the lesional elastin with testicular hyaluronidase increased its solubilization two-fold and generated a unique 15,000 Da molecular weight fragment. Elastin prepared from PXE skin may contain bound glycosaminoglycans which interfere with elastase activity. The susceptibility of normal skin elastin to proteolytic degradation may have implications in the study of aging skin.
Change in arterial stiffness is generally considered a risk factor for cardiovascular disease and, in various ways, has been associated with hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, atherosclerosis, and heart failure, likely because of altered dynamics of the wall and of the fluid-wall interplay in pulsatile flow. We present a comprehensive analytical study of longitudinal displacements and stresses within the thickness of the vessel wall induced by pulsatile flow at different times within the cardiac cycle, using the fractional derivative model which has been found to provide a good descriptor of the rheological material's response to frequency. The results indicate that the extent of displacement and shear stress within the depth of the vessel wall depend critically on the degree to which the wall is tethered to surrounding tissue and on the mechanical consistency of the wall material, particularly on the relative proportions of viscous and elastic content within the wall. In particular, loss of viscous consistency leads to higher shear stresses within the wall thus putting higher loading on elastin and may ultimately lead to elastin fatigue and, as elastin gradually fails, its load bearing function is presumably taken over by collagen which renders the vessel wall less elastic and more rigid as is indeed observed in the aging process. It is thus concluded that loss of viscous content within the vessel wall, whether by disease or aging, may be a prelude to elastin fatigue and elastin failure within the vessel wall.
UV-induced oxidative stress and photoaging.
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
Cutaneous ageing, as visualized at the exposed areas of skin, reflects dramatic alterations in the structure and function of the extracellular matrix of connective tissues. Among them, the elastic fibre network, which is responsible for the physiological elasticity and resilience of normal skin, undergoes degradative changes leading to loss of functional elastic fibres. A potential strategy to counteract these degenerative changes entails topical application of a compound that may lead to regeneration of the elastic fibre network. In this study, we have evaluated the effects of a bi-metal, 0.1% copper-zinc malonate-containing cream that has been shown to efface wrinkles in clinical trials. An effect on elastin biosynthesis and elastic tissue accumulation in skin biopsies was observed in 21 female patients with photoaged facial skin, as measured at baseline and at 6 weeks of treatment. Histopathological evaluation revealed evidence of elastic fibre regeneration, including those extending perpendicularly towards the dermo-epidermal junction within the papillary dermis. Elastin biosynthesis, measured by semi-quantitative immunofluorescence with an antibody recognizing only the newly synthesized, uncrosslinked tropoelastin molecules, suggested statistically significant enhancement of elastin biosynthesis by the bi-metal compound when applied twice daily. Accumulation of elastic fibres was confirmed by assay of desmosine, an elastin-specific crosslink compound. These results suggest that the bi-metal, 0.1% copper-zinc malonate-containing cream has the propensity to increase elastin synthesis in human skin in vivo, and that regeneration of elastic fibres may contribute to wrinkle effacement in female patients with photoaged facial skin.
Randomized Controlled Trial
Aged, 80 and over
Department of Paediatrics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. E.Morava@cukz.umcn.nl
The clinical spectrum of the autosomal recessive cutis laxa syndromes is highly heterogeneous with respect to organ involvement and severity. One of the major diagnostic criteria is to detect abnormal elastin fibers. In several other clinically similar autosomal recessive syndromes, however, the classic histological anomalies are absent, and the definite diagnosis remains uncertain. In cutis laxa patients mutations have been demonstrated in elastin or fibulin genes, but in the majority of patients the underlying genetic etiology remains unknown. Recently, we found mutations in the ATP6V0A2 gene in families with autosomal recessive cutis laxa. This genetic defect is associated with abnormal glycosylation leading to a distinct combined disorder of the biosynthesis of N- and O-linked glycans. Interestingly, similar mutations have been found in patients with wrinkly skin syndrome, without the presence of severe skin symptoms of elastin deficiency. These findings suggest that the cutis laxa and wrinkly skin syndromes are phenotypic variants of the same disorder. Interestingly many phenotypically similar patients carry no mutations in the ATP6V0A2 gene. The variable presence of protein glycosylation abnormalities in the diverse clinical forms of the wrinkled skin-cutis laxa syndrome spectrum necessitates revisiting the diagnostic criteria to be able to offer adequate prognosis assessment and counseling. This paper aims at describing the spectrum of clinical features of the various forms of autosomal recessive cutis laxa syndromes. Based on the recently unraveled novel genetic entity we also review the genetic aspects in cutis laxa syndromes including genotype-phenotype correlations and suggest a practical diagnostic approach.
De Barsy syndrome and ATP6V0A2-CDG.
De Barsy syndrome and ATP6V0A2-CDG.
Hyperoxia disrupts postnatal lung development in part through inducing inflammation. To determine the contribution of leukocyte-derived reactive oxygen species, we exposed newborn wild-type and NADPH oxidase p47(phox) subunit null (p47(phox-/-)) mice to air or acute hyperoxia (95% O(2)) for up to 11 days. Hyperoxia-induced pulmonary neutrophil influx was similar in wild-type and p47(-/-) mice at postnatal days (P) 7 and 11. Macrophages were decreased in wild-type hyperoxia-exposed mice compared with p47(phox-/-) mice at P11. Hyperoxia impaired type II alveolar epithelial cell and bronchiolar epithelial cell proliferation, but depression of type II cell proliferation was significantly less in p47(-/-) mice at P3 and P7, when inflammation was minimal. We found reciprocal results for the expression of the cell cycle inhibitor p21(cip/waf) in type II cells, which was induced in 95% O(2)-exposed wild-type mice, but significantly less in p47(phox-/-) littermates at P7. Despite partial preservation of type II cell proliferation, deletion of p47(phox) did not prevent the major adverse effects of hyperoxia on alveolar development estimated by morphometry at P11, but hyperoxia impairment of elastin deposition at alveolar septal crests was significantly worse in wild-type vs. p47(phox-/-) mice at P11. Since we found that p47(phox) is expressed in a subset of alveolar epithelial cells, its deletion may protect postnatal type II alveolar epithelial proliferation from hyperoxia through effects on epithelial as well as phagocyte-generated superoxide.
Changes in aortic levels of tropoelastin mRNA following treatment of rats with the antihypertensive drugs captopril and hydralazine.
This manuscript describes changes in the steady state levels of aortic tropoelastin mRNA in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and normotensive controls (WKY) following treatment with two antihypertensive drugs. Three-week-old WKY and SHR rats were treated with hydralazine (15 mg/kg/day) or captopril (25 mg/kg/day). Tail artery blood pressure was monitored twice weekly. Both drugs prevented the development of hypertension in the SHR rat. At 6 weeks of age, total aortic RNA was extracted and the steady state levels of mRNAs coding for tropoelastin and pro alpha 1 (III) collagen were determined by slot blot hybridization analysis using radiolabeled tropoelastin and pro alpha 1 (III) collagen cDNA clones. Hydralazine treatment resulted in a threefold increase in tropoelastin mRNA levels in both the SHR and the WKY animals (P less than 0.01). Captopril-treated SHR animals demonstrated a similar significant increase. In contrast, no differences in pro alpha 1 (III) collagen mRNA levels were observed in the aorta of SHR or WKY rats following treatment with either captopril or hydralazine. These data suggest that antihypertensive agents can act specifically to directly induce tropoelastin mRNA levels in large arteries and thus may induce vascular remodeling independent of an increase in blood pressure.
Effects of chronic treatment with a low dose of nicorandil on the function of the rat aorta during ageing.
Laboratory of Vascular Physiopathologies: Cellular Interactions, Signalling and Ageing, Joseph Fourier University, Grenoble, F-38041, France.
1. It is known that ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channels regulate the membrane potential of smooth muscle cells and vascular tone. Because their activity is altered during ageing, many pharmacological treatments aimed at improving K(ATP) channel and cardiovascular functions have been evaluated. Nicorandil, a K(ATP) channel opener, nitric oxide (NO) donor and anti-oxidant, induces vasodilation, decreases blood pressure and exhibits cardioprotection in ageing, as well as after ischaemia-reperfusion. 2. In the present study, using tension myography and biochemical and histological techniques, we investigated the effects of chronic (2 months) low-dose nicorandil (0.1 mg/kg per day) treatment on the function of rat aorta during ageing (in 4-, 12- and 24-month old rats). 3. The results showed that chronic nicorandil treatment significantly improves mechanical relaxation and noradrenaline-induced vasoconstriction in aged rats. At all ages, the nicorandil-induced vasodilation was primarily mediated by its NO donor group. Nicorandil treatment resulted in an additional 0.5-1 elastic lamella in the aorta and decreased total protein, collagen and elastin content in the aortic wall at all ages. However, in 4-month-old rats, nicorandil significantly increased the elastin : total protein ratio by 19%. 4. In contrast with results of previous studies that used high doses of nicorandil (i.e. 60 mg/kg per day), low-dose nicorandil treatment in the present study did not lead to a progressive desensitization to nicorandil and may be beneficial in improving arterial function in ageing or cardiovascular diseases.
Laboratory of Hemodynamics and Cardiovascular Technology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne, Switzerland. edouard.fonck@a3.epfl.ch
Aging affects elastin, a key component of the arterial wall integrity and functionality. Elastin degradation in cerebral vessels is associated with cerebrovascular disease. The goal of this study is to assess the biomechanical properties of human cerebral arteries, their composition, and their geometry, with particular focus on the functional alteration of elastin attributable to aging.
Twelve posterior cranial arteries obtained from human cadavers of 2 different age groups were compared morphologically and tested biomechanically before and after enzymatic degradation of elastin. Light, confocal, and scanning electron microscopy were used to analyze and determine structural differences, potentially attributed to aging.
Aging affects structural morphology and the mechanical properties of intracranial arteries. In contrast to main systemic arteries, intima and media thicken while outer diameter remains relatively constant with age, leading to concentric hypertrophy. The structural morphology of elastin changed from a fiber network oriented primarily in the circumferential direction to a more heterogeneously oriented fiber mesh, especially at the intima. Biomechanically, cerebral arteries stiffen with age and lose compliance in the elastin dominated regime. Enzymatic degradation of elastin led to loss in compliance and stiffening in the young group but did not affect the structural and material properties in the older group, suggesting that elastin, though present in equal quantities in the old group, becomes dysfunctional with aging.
Elastin loses its functionality in cerebral arteries with aging, leading to stiffer less compliant arteries. The area fraction of elastin remained, however, fairly constant. The loss of functionality may thus be attributed to fragmentation and structural reorganization of elastin occurring with age.
Aged, 80 and over
Global Research and Development, Nu Skin Enterprises, Provo, UT 84601, USA. heknaggs@nuskin.com
There has been a considerable increase in understanding how skin ages, along with significant progress toward the correction and prevention of the visible signs of aging. However, there are still many unknown factors regarding why we age - and why we all seem to age differently. An area of high interest is the biological or intrinsic processes that affect our appearance over time. This article describes a recent discovery of a membrane bound enzyme proven to be present in skin and increases its activity as biological age increases. The enzyme is located on the external surface of both fibroblast and keratinocytes, and generates free radicals. Therefore, as we age there appears to be a biological mechanism that further increases the production of free radicals. Additionally, there appears to be a relationship between activity of the enzyme and appearance. Data showed that subjects who look younger than their biological age had lower enzyme activity and conversely, subjects who looked older than their biological age had higher enzyme activity. Free radicals are believed to be a major contributing factor in the production of fine lines and wrinkles by destroying the collagen and elastin network keeping skin supple and firm.
Division of Human Anatomy, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Biotechnology, University of Brescia, viale Europa, 11, 25124 Brescia, Italy. corsetti@med.unibs.it
The principal goal in treating surgical and non-surgical wounds, in particular for aged skin, is the need for rapid closure of the lesion. Cutaneous wound healing processes involve four phases including an inflammatory response with the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines. If inflammation develops in response to bacterial infection, it can create a problem for wound closure. Reduced inflammation accelerates wound closure with subsequent increased fibroblast function and collagen synthesis. On the contrary, prolonged chronic inflammation results in very limited wound healing. Using histological and immunohistochemical techniques, we investigated the effects of a new wound dressing called Vulnamin that contains four essential amino acids for collagen and elastin synthesis plus sodium ialuronate (Na-Ial), compared with Na-Ial alone, in closure of experimental cutaneous wounds of aged rats. Our results showed that the application of Vulnamin dressings modulated the inflammatory response with a reduction in the number of inflammatory cells and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) immunolocalisation, while increasing endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) immunolocalisation. Furthermore, the dressing increased the distribution density of fibroblasts and aided the synthesis of thin collagen fibers resulting in a reduction in healing time. The nutritive approach using this new wound dressing can provide an efficacious and safe strategy to accelerate wound healing in elderly subjects, simplifying therapeutic procedures and leading to an improved quality of life.
Bandages*
Wounds and Injuries/drug therapy*
Wounds and Injuries/metabolism
Wounds and Injuries/pathology
Wounds and Injuries - MedlinePlus Health Information
Importance of pulsatility in hypertensive carotid artery growth and remodeling.
Department of Biomedical Engineering and M.E. DeBakey Institute, USA.
Arteries experience marked variations in blood pressure and flow during the cardiac cycle that can intensify during exercise, in disease, or with aging. Diverse observations increasingly suggest the importance of such pulsatility in arterial homeostasis and adaptations. We used a transverse aortic arch banding model to quantify chronic effects of increased pulsatile pressure and flow on wall morphology, composition, and biaxial mechanical properties in paired mouse arteries: the highly pulsatile right common carotid artery proximal to the band (RCCA-B) and the nearly normal left common carotid artery distal to the band (LCCA-B). Increased pulsatile mechanical stimuli in RCCA-B increased wall thickness compared with LCCA-B, which correlated more strongly with pulse (r* = 0.632; P &lt; 0.01) than mean (r* = 0.020; P = 0.47) or systolic (r* = 0.466; P &lt; 0.05) pressure. Similarly, inner diameter at mean pressure increased in RCCA-B and correlated slightly more strongly with a normalized index of blood velocity pulsatility (r* = 0.915; P &lt; &lt;0.001) than mean flow (r* = 0.834; P &lt; 0.001). Increased wall thickness and luminal diameter in RCCA-B resulted from significant increases in cell number per cross-sectional area (P &lt; 0.001) and collagen-to-elastin ratio (P &lt; 0.05) as well as a moderate (1.7-fold) increase in glycosaminoglycan content, which appears to have contributed to the significant decrease (P &lt; 0.001) in the in-vivo axial stretch in RCCA-B compared with LCCA-B. Changes in RCCA-B also associated with a signficant increase in monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (P &lt; 0.05) whereas LCCA-B did not. Pulsatile pressure and flow are thus important stimuli in the observed three-dimensional arterial adaptations, and there is a need for increased attention to the roles of both axial wall stress and adventitial remodeling.
Tissue elasticity and the ageing elastic fibre.
Tissue Injury and Repair Group, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. michael.j.sherratt@manchester.ac.uk
The ability of elastic tissues to deform under physiological forces and to subsequently release stored energy to drive passive recoil is vital to the function of many dynamic tissues. Within vertebrates, elastic fibres allow arteries and lungs to expand and contract, thus controlling variations in blood pressure and returning the pulmonary system to a resting state. Elastic fibres are composite structures composed of a cross-linked elastin core and an outer layer of fibrillin microfibrils. These two components perform distinct roles; elastin stores energy and drives passive recoil, whilst fibrillin microfibrils direct elastogenesis, mediate cell signalling, maintain tissue homeostasis via TGFβ sequestration and potentially act to reinforce the elastic fibre. In many tissues reduced elasticity, as a result of compromised elastic fibre function, becomes increasingly prevalent with age and contributes significantly to the burden of human morbidity and mortality. This review considers how the unique molecular structure, tissue distribution and longevity of elastic fibres pre-disposes these abundant extracellular matrix structures to the accumulation of damage in ageing dermal, pulmonary and vascular tissues. As compromised elasticity is a common feature of ageing dynamic tissues, the development of strategies to prevent, limit or reverse this loss of function will play a key role in reducing age-related morbidity and mortality.
Isolation and structure analysis of two amino acids from bovine ligamentum nuchae elastin hydrolysates revealed the presence of pyridine cross-links in elastin. The structures of these amino acids were determined to have 3,4,5- and 2,3,5-trisubstituted pyridine skeletons both with three carboxylic acids and a mass of 396 (C(18)H(28)N(4)0(6)) identified as 4-(4-amino-4-carboxybutyl)-3,5-di-(3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)-pyridine and 2-(4-amino-4-carboxybutyl)-3,5-di-(3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)-pyridine. We have named these pyridine cross-links desmopyridine (DESP) and isodesmopyridine (IDP), respectively. Structure analysis of these pyridine cross-links implied that the formation of these cross-links involved the condensation reaction between ammonia and allysine. The elastin incubated with ammonium chloride showed that DESP and IDP levels increased as the allysine content decreased. DESP and IDP were measured by high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) with UV detection and were found in a variety of bovine tissues. The DESP/desmosine (DES) and IDP/isodesmosine (IDE) ratios in aorta elastin were higher than in other tissues. DESP and IDP contents in human aorta elastin were found to be gradually increased with age. The concentration of IDP was significantly elevated in aorta elastin of rat with chronic liver cirrhosis induced by carbon tetrachloride (mean +/- S.D.; 11.1 +/- 0.9 nmol/mg elastin) when compared with normal rats (5.9 +/- 1.5 nmol/mg elastin). Although DESP and IDP are present at only trace concentrations in the tissue elastin, these pyridine cross-links may be useful biomarkers for the aortic elastin damaged by ammonia.
Solar elastosis is observed in the dermis of photoaged skin and is characterized by an accumulation of abnormal elastin in the extracellular space. Several proteases that degrade elastin in the extracellular space have been implicated in its formation. The lysosomal protease cathepsin K (catK) has recently been described to be highly expressed in skin fibroblasts under certain pathologic conditions. As cat K is one of the most potent mammalian elastases, we hypothesized that catK-mediated intracellular elastin degradation may play a role in the formation of solar elastosis. Immunostaining of cultured skin fibroblasts incubated with labeled elastin demonstrated internalization of extracellular elastin to lysosomes and its degradation by catK. Induction of catK expression in fibroblasts was observed both in vitro and in vivo after exposure to longwave UVA. In contrast to fibroblasts from young donors, cells from old donors failed to activate catK in response to UVA. These data suggest a role of intracellular elastin degradation by catK in the formation of solar elastosis. We propose that an age-related decline in catK activity, in particular after UV exposure, may promote the formation of actinic elastosis through a decline of orderly intracellular elastin degradation and subsequent accumulation of elastin in the extracellular space.
Effects of infrared radiation and heat on human skin aging in vivo.
Sunlight damages human skin, resulting in a wrinkled appearance. Since natural sunlight is polychromatic, its ultimate effects on the human skin are the result of not only the action of each wavelength separately, but also interactions among the many wavelengths, including UV, visible light, and infrared (IR). In direct sunlight, the temperature of human skin rises to about 40 degrees C following the conversion of absorbed IR into heat. So far, our knowledge of the effects of IR radiation or heat on skin aging is limited. Recent work demonstrates that IR and heat exposure each induces cutaneous angiogenesis and inflammatory cellular infiltration, disrupts the dermal extracellular matrix by inducing matrix metalloproteinases, and alters dermal structural proteins, thereby adding to premature skin aging. This review provides a summary of current research on the effects of IR radiation and heat on aging in human skin in vivo.Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings (2009) 14, 15-19; doi:10.1038/jidsymp.2009.7.
Cellular senescence of human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) is associated with an altered MMP-7/HB-EGF signaling and increased formation of elastin-like structures.
Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Biochemistry and Tumor Biology Lab (OE6411), Medical School, D - 30625 Hannover, Germany.
The extracellular matrix (ECM) and a complex interplay of cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix (ECM) interactions provide important platforms to determine cellular senescence and a potentially tumorigenic transformation of normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). An enhanced formation of extracellular filaments, consisting of elastin-like structures, in senescent post-selection HMEC populations was paralleled by a significantly increased expression of its precursor protein tropoelastin and matched with a markedly elevated activity of the cross-linking enzyme family of lysyl oxidases (LOX). RNAi experiments revealed both the ECM metalloproteinase MMP-7 and the growth factor HB-EGF as potential effectors of an increased tropoelastin expression. Moreover, co-localization of MMP-7 and HB-EGF as well as a concomittant downstream signaling via Fra-1 indicated a possible association between the reduced MMP-7 enzyme activity and an impaired HB-EGF processing, resulting in an enhanced tropoelastin synthesis during senescence of HMEC. In agreement with previous work, these findings suggested an important influence of the extracellular proteinase MMP-7 on the aging process of HMEC, affecting both extracellular remodeling as well as intracellular signaling pathways.
Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/metabolism*
Mammary Glands, Human/cytology
Mammary Glands, Human/enzymology*
Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
Pulse wave velocity and age- and gender-dependent aortic wall hardening in fowl.
Before sexual maturation, chickens (Gallus gallus) show high blood pressure (BP) and neointimal plaques in the lower abdominal aortae (AbA). We investigated age/sex-related changes in pulse wave velocity (PWV), elastin, collagen, and protein levels in AbA, and cardiac morphology to determine whether PWV increases during incremental increases in BP of maturing fowl, while arterial stiffness becomes dominant with aging. PWV (m/s) was significantly greater in male chicks (6-7 weeks, 9.3+/-0.8; females, 6.1+/-0.5) and remained high in cockerels (13 weeks), young (27-28 weeks), and adults (44-66 weeks). PWV increased in prepubertal pullets (10.0+/-0.9), dropped significantly in young hens, and remained low in adults. In contrast, medial thickness, protein levels, and collagen levels increased, while elastin/collagen ratios decreased, with maturation/aging. Males had heavier ventricular mass and thicker ventricular walls than females at all ages; left ventricular thickness decreased with maturation/aging. Thus, sustained high BP may have caused progressive medial hypertrophy, increased aortic rigidity, and enlarged hearts with left ventricular dilation. PWV of AbA was already greater in male chicks at an age when both sexes have similar collagen levels and low protein levels, suggesting that a factor other than structural stiffness may be an important determinant of PWV.
Comparison between human fetal and adult skin.
Association of Dutch Burn Centres, P.O. Box 1015, 1940 EA, Beverwijk, The Netherlands.
Healing of early-gestation fetal wounds results in scarless healing. Since the capacity for regeneration is probably inherent to the fetal skin itself, knowledge of the fetal skin composition may contribute to the understanding of fetal wound healing. The aim of this study was to analyze the expression profiles of different epidermal and dermal components in the human fetal and adult skin. In the human fetal skin (ranging from 13 to 22 weeks' gestation) and adult skin biopsies, the expression patterns of several epidermal proteins (K10, K14, K16, K17, SKALP, involucrin), basement membrane proteins, Ki-67, blood vessels and extracellular matrix proteins (fibronectin, chondroitin sulfate, elastin) were determined using immunohistochemistry. The expression profiles of K17, involucrin, dermal Ki-67, fibronectin and chondroitin sulfate were higher in the fetal skin than in adult skin. In the fetal skin, elastin was not present in the dermis, but it was found in the adult skin. The expression patterns of basement membrane proteins, blood vessels, K10, K14, K16 and epidermal Ki-67 were similar in human fetal skin and adult skin. In this systematic overview, most of the differences between fetal and adult skin were found at the level of dermal extracellular matrix molecules expression. This study suggests that, especially, dermal components are important in fetal scarless healing.
During ageing, the function of sinoatrial node (SAN), the pacemaker of the heart, declines, and the incidence of sick sinus syndrome increases markedly. The aim of the study was to investigate structural and functional remodelling of the SAN during ageing. Rats, 3 and 24 months old (equivalent to young adult and approximately 69-year-old humans), were studied. Extracellular potential recording from right atrial preparations showed that (as expected) the intrinsic heart rate was slower in the old animals. It also showed a shift of the leading pacemaker site towards the inferior vena cava in the old animals. Consistent with this, intracellular potential recording showed that slow pacemaker action potentials were more widespread and extended further towards the inferior vena cava in old animals. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that SAN tissue expressing HCN4, but lacking the expression of Na(v)1.5 (lack of Na(v)1.5 explains why pacemaker action potential is slow), was also more widespread and extended further towards the inferior vena cava in the old animals. Immunolabelling of caveolin3 (expressed in cell membrane of cardiac myocytes) demonstrated that there was a hypertrophy of the SAN cells in the old animals. Histology, quantitative PCR, and immunohistochemistry revealed evidence of a substantial age-dependent remodelling of the extracellular matrix (e.g. approximately 79% downregulation of genes responsible for collagens 1 and 3 and approximately 52% downregulation of gene responsible for elastin). It is concluded that the age- (and/or obesity-) dependent decline in SAN function is associated with a structural remodelling of the SAN: an enlargement of the SAN, a hypertrophy of the SAN cells, and a remodelling of the extracellular matrix.
Department of Clinical and Molecular Ophthalmogenetics, Netherlands Institute of Neurosciences (NIN), An Institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), Meibergdreef 47, 1105 BA Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Bruch's membrane (BM) is a unique pentalaminar structure, which is strategically located between the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and the fenestrated choroidal capillaries of the eye. BM is an elastin- and collagen-rich extracellular matrix that acts as a molecular sieve. BM partly regulates the reciprocal exchange of biomolecules, nutrients, oxygen, fluids and metabolic waste products between the retina and the general circulation. Accumulating evidence suggests that the molecular, structural and functional properties of BM are dependent on age, genetic constitution, environmental factors, retinal location and disease state. As a result, part of the properties of BM are unique to each human individual at a given age, and therefore uniquely affect the development of normal vision and ocular disease. The changes occurring in BM with age include increased calcification of elastic fibres, increased cross-linkage of collagen fibres and increased turnover of glycosaminoglycans. In addition, advanced glycation end products (AGEs) and fat accumulate in BM. These age-related changes may not only influence the normal age-related health of photoreceptor cells, but also the onset and progression of diseases like retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Undoubtedly, BM is the site of drusen development. Confluent drusen and uncontrolled activation of the complement cascade are most likely the first signs of AMD. Furthermore, the nature of adhesive interactions between the RPE and BM are instrumental in the development of retinal detachments and proliferative retinal disease. Finally, BM is passively or actively involved in a range of other retinal disorders such as Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), Sorsby's Fundus Dystrophy and Malattia Leventinese. Here, we review the dynamic nature of Bruch's membrane, from molecule to man, during development, aging and disease. We propose a simple and straightforward nomenclature for BM deposits. Finally, we attempt to correlate recently published mRNA expression profiles of the RPE and choroid with molecular, structural and functional properties of BM. Our review may shed light on the complex involvement of BM in retinal pathology, notably age-related macular degeneration.
Coquand-Gandit M
Antibodies recognizing the elastin precursor tropoelastin (ATEAb) or degradation products alpha-elastin (AEAb) are found in the serum of healthy human subjects, as a part of a homeostatic mechanism which assembles new or clears altered elastin structures. Serum ATEAb (reflecting elastin synthesis) and AEAb (reflecting elastin destruction) appear to correlate with the production and breakdown of the elastic tissue, respectively.
The aim of this study was to investigate plasma levels of AEAb and ATEAb in senescence-accelerated prone (SAMP8) and senescence-accelerated resistant (SAMR1) mice, compared with imprinting control region (ICR) mice in order to evaluate their age-related changes.
The levels of AEAb and ATEAb were measured by home-made ELISA in plasma of SAMP8, SAMR1, and ICR mice, grouped according to their age (3 and 9 months) and sex. The specificity of AEAb and ATEAb activity in mouse plasma, and elastin-derived peptides (EDP) in sera of ICR mice at 3 and 9 months of age were tested by competitive ELISA.
The specificity of AEAb and ATEAb in mouse plasma was confirmed by the competitive investigations. The levels of AEAb in the plasma of SAMR1 and SAMP8 were increased compared to the levels measured in ICR on the matched ages (p &lt; 0.001). Age-related increase of the levels of AEAb and ATEAb was established in the 3 strains (p &lt; 0.001). Significantly higher levels of AEAb were established in female 9-month-old mice compared to males in all strains. The ATEAb:AEAb ratio was significantly lower in the SAM compared to the ICR strain. Positive correlation was established between the levels of serum AEAb and EDP in mouse sera of ICR mice.
Variations with age in the plasma levels of AEAb and ATEAb were established in SAM compared with ICR, and in SAMP8 compared with SAMR1. Our findings suggest that increased anti-elastin IgG autoantibodies could be used as a marker of aging in SAM and possibly contribute to the processes of aging. The absence of a difference between SAMP8 and SAMR1 regarding the ATEAb:AEAb ratio raises the question if SAMR1 are an appropriate control of SAMP8 in terms of the senescence of the elastic tissues.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
Scoring of collagen organization in healthy and diseased human dermis by multiphoton microscopy.
L.E.N.S. and Department of Physics, University of Florence, Sesto Fiorentino, Italy. rikka@lens.unifi.it
We have used nonlinear imaging to evaluate collagen organization in connective tissue ex-vivo samples. Image analysis methods were tested on healthy dermis, normal scars, and keloids. The evaluation of the second harmonic to autofluorescence aging index of dermis (SAAID) has allowed a first characterization of tissues by scoring the collagen/elastin content. Further analyses on collagen morphology in healthy dermis and keloids were performed by image-pattern analysis of SHG images. The gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) analysis method has allowed classification of different tissues based on the evaluation of geometrical arrangement of collagen fibrillar bundles, whereas a pattern analysis of the FFT images has allowed the discrimination of different tissues based on the anisotropy of collagen fibers distribution. This multiple scoring method represents a promising tool to be extended to other collagen disorders, as well as to be used in in-vivo skin-imaging applications.
Aspartic acid racemisation (AAR) results in an age-dependent accumulation of D: -aspartic acid in durable human proteins and can be used as a basis for age estimation. Routinely, age estimation based on AAR is performed by analysis of dentine. However, in forensic practise, teeth are not always available. Non-dental tissues for age estimation may be suitable for age estimation based on AAR if they contain durable proteins that can be purified and analysed. Elastin is such a durable protein. To clarify if purified elastin from arteries is a suitable sample for biochemical age estimation, AAR was determined in purified elastin from arteries from individuals of known age (n = 68 individuals, including n = 15 putrefied corpses), considering the influence of different stages of atherosclerosis and putrefaction on the AAR values. AAR was found to increase with age. The relationship between AAR and age was good enough to serve as basis for age estimation, but worse than known from dentinal proteins. Intravital and post-mortem degradation of elastin may have a moderate effect on the AAR values. Age estimation based on AAR in purified elastin from arteries may be a valuable additional tool in the identification of unidentified cadavers, especially in cases where other methods cannot be applied (e.g., no available teeth and body parts).
Aged, 80 and over
Collagen Research Group, Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Clinical Veterinary Sciences, University of Bristol, Churchill Building, Langford Summerset, BS40 5DS, Bristol, UK. a.j.bailey@bristol.ac.uk
The outward manifestations of tissue ageing occurring in the elderly primarily involve the two major structural proteins of the body, collagen and elastin. The changes in these proteins are associated with intermolecular cross-linking and side-chain modifications. Cross-linking involves two different mechanisms, a precise enzymic process during development and maturation, and a subsequent non-enzymic adventitious reaction with glucose during ageing. The latter glycation reactions are the major cause of tissue dysfunction in the elderly due to cross-linking, which stiffens the tissues, and to side-chain modification, which alters normal cell-matrix interactions. Photoageing by UV involves two competing reactions, chain cleavage and cross-linking, the former predominating on long-term exposure. The molecular mechanisms involved are gradually being unravelled and will lead to the development of inhibitors of these deleterious effects of ageing.
Aging-related cell-surface NADH oxidase (arNOX)-specific activities increase with age between age 30 and ages 50-65. The protein is shed and circulates. Activity correlates with a number of aging-related disorders including low-density lipoprotein (LDL) oxidation as a precondition to atherosclerosis as well as oxidation of collagen and elastin as a major contributor to skin aging. arNOX inhibitors formulated for sustained release are capable of maintaining circulating arNOX at low levels with regular use as food supplements formulated with natural compounds. Among the best sources are certain culinary seasonings, all of which are ingredients used extensively in the French kitchen. Their regular use may contribute to an understanding of the nutritional basis for the French Paradox.
Evaluation of extracellular matrix turnover. Methods and results for normal human lung parenchymal elastin.
Receptors and aging: dedicated to the memory of Paul Ehrlich for the 100th anniversary of his Nobel Prize.
The initiation and evolution of the receptor concept and its application in pharmacology can be traced back to Paul Ehrlich's original experiments. Since several decades the receptor concept is in the foreground of cell biology and pharmacology. We present here a short reminder of Ehrlich's concepts on receptor action, its evolution and modifications as a result of increasing life expectancy of human societies. Results obtained by several teams on the age-dependent modifications of receptor function are reviewed with special emphasis on the age-dependent loss of receptors and of uncoupling of receptors from their intracellular transmission pathway. As a special example we summarize our results on the elastin receptor and its age-dependent modifications. These modifications result in the loss of the physiologically helpful functions mediated by this receptor, such as vasodilation by coupling with the inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)-inhibition of cellular cholesterol synthesis and modulation of free radical production by inhibition of the guanine nucleotide binding protein (Gi protein)-mediated transmission pathway. Only the harmful effects such as free radical release and up-regulation of elastase production remain in "old" cells. The age-dependent modifications of receptor function play an important role in the increasing frequency and severity of age-related diseases such as athero-arteriosclerosis and emphysema as well as the loss of hormone- and drug actions. These processes and their inhibition or correction represent a new challenge for cellular pharmacology.
Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
Allergy and Immunology/history
A morphometric quantitation of developmental changes in elastic fibers in rat lung parenchyma: variability with lung region and postnatal age.
Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106.
Elastin has long been thought to play a pivotal role in alveolar septal development by providing the structural framework around which new alveoli develop in the immature lung. This theory was derived from observations that the dramatic increase in lung elastin and alveolar septal development occurred during the same time period, days 4 to 13 in the rat. Using stereologic techniques, we evaluated volume density of respiratory tissue in parenchyma and total length of parenchymal elastic fibers in the lungs of neonatal rats ranging in age from 4 to 26 days. Lung tissue was obtained from each of the four right lung lobes and from the upper, middle, and lower regions of the left lung. When changes in these two parameters in the lung as a whole were considered by averaging values for each of the seven regions, a continuous increase was observed in both the volume of parenchymal tissue in parenchyma and the total length of elastic fibers from days 4 to 22. A significant correlation was found between the volume of respiratory tissue in parenchyma and the length of parenchymal elastic fibers from days 4 to 26, supporting the existing theory that a causal relationship exists between these two parameters. A comparison of the ratios of elastic fiber length to volume density of respiratory tissue in parenchyma (Lv/Vrp) from each of the seven lung regions sampled indicated a significant variability in Lv/Vrp within different regions of the same lung. In addition, the effects of postnatal age and lung region on Lv/Vrp were interdependent; the lung regions that differed with respect to the length density of elastic fibers varied with postnatal age.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Species differences of elastic and collagenous tissue--influence of maturation and age.
Age-dependence of mechanical and biochemical parameters has been studied in pigeons between 1 and 80 months and in rats between 1 and 30 months. In pigeons, body weight, bone weight and breaking strength of femur and tibia are only slightly increased during this time indicating that in this species maturation takes place as early as during the first 4 weeks after hatching. In contrast, in rats a sharp increase of these parameters during maturation and a significant decrease during senescence was observed. Similarly, ultimate load of aorta rings was only sightly influenced by aging in pigeons, but showed in rats a biphasic pattern due to maturation and aging. The prepatagial tendon in pigeons gives the unique opportunity to study an organ consisting mostly of elastic fibres. Only a slightly increase of strength during the whole life-span, but no decrease during senescence was found. Tail tendons in rats consisting almost entirely of collagen fibres show a pronounced increase during maturation and a decrease during aging. The mechanical values were followed closely by the collagen content, but not at all by the elastin content.
Bone and Bones/chemistry*
Bone and Bones/physiology
The Saga of kappa-elastin or the promotion of elastin degradation products from "garbage" to receptor agonists and pharmacologically active principles.
In this review article, dedicated to Prof. Ines Mandl, for her 90st birthday, some of the essential steps of our research over the years on elastin are described. Insoluble fibrous elastin could be "solubilized" by 1M KOH in 80% aqueous ethanol at room temperature. The large peptides obtained were designated kappa-elastin after a suggestion by I. Mandl. These peptides were widely used for biological, biochemical and pharmacological studies and were also commercialized and applied in "anti-aging" preparations. Kappa-elastin was used to demonstrate the importance of hydrophobic interactions in the stalilization of elastin fibers. It was used also as an "agonist" for studies on the elastin receptor and its age-dependent modifications (uncoupling). Kappa-elastin became also an important ingredient for dermocosmetology. This review spans several decades from the discovery of the first elastase, by Banga and Balo, in the 1950-ies to the pharmacological studies of the elastin receptor in the recent years.
Arterial compliance describes a change in the volume of arteries following a change in blood pressure. The physical basis of the compliance concept and experimental procedures in animals both indicate that the relation between arterial compliance and blood pressure pattern is often unclear. Compliance is pressure-dependent because of the biphasic elastin and collagen composition of arteries and, hence, decreases when blood pressure increases. Compliance also determines the pulsatile amplitude of the pressure wave by regulating the buffering function of an artery's face to the cardiac pump and, accordingly, its reduction induces a selective increase in systolic level. The questions are whether these theoretical and experimental phenomena can be extrapolated to human hypertension and whether they can be assessed from indirect measurement of arterial compliance by means of a time-domain analysis of arterial pressure and flow waves via various models of the arterial tree. Whatever the method and site of measurement, arterial compliance was found to be decreased in different forms of hypertension. This low compliance can be considered to have a causal role in elderly patients with isolated systolic hypertension. In contrast, in patients with systolo-diastolic hypertension physiologic and pharmacologic arguments exist against the fact that low arterial compliance may be the pure consequence of mean blood pressure elevation. Moreover, it is suggested that aging acts in concurrence with pressure elevation to decrease arterial compliance, and that in certain hypertensive patients additional factors, perhaps atherosclerotic in nature, contribute to impair the elastic properties of arteries.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Molecular and functional effects of organismal ageing on smooth muscle cells derived from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells.
Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, 908 Furnas Hall, Amherst, NY 14260-4200, USA.
Bone marrow-derived smooth muscle cells (BM-SMCs) have high potential as an autologous cell source of vascular progenitors but normal cell function and turnover frequency may decline with age. In this study we set out to study the effects of organismal ageing on the molecular and functional properties of BM-SMCs.
To address this issue, we employed a smooth muscle alpha-actin promoter (alphaSMA) driving expression of enhanced green fluorescence protein (EGFP) to isolate SMCs from bone marrow of neonatal (nBM-SMCs) or adult (aBM-SMCs) sheep and examined their proliferation potential and contractility. Compared with nBM-SMCs, aBM-SMCs exhibited lower clonogenicity and proliferation potential that could be improved significantly by addition of basic fibroblast growth factor. Vascular constructs from aBM-SMCs showed reduced ability to generate force and contract fibrin hydrogels and this function could be partially restored by addition of transforming growth factor-beta1. They also exhibited lower receptor- and non-receptor-mediated vascular contractility and mechanical strength, which was comparable to that of tissue constructs prepared with vascular SMCs from neonatal umbilical veins. In agreement with the contractile properties and mechanical strength of vascular constructs, aBM-SMCs displayed significantly lower expression of alphaSMA, smoothelin, desmin, type I collagen, and tropoelastin transcripts compared with nBM-SMCs.
Understanding the effects of organismal ageing on BM-SMCs and the properties of the resulting vascular constructs may lead to innovative ways to facilitate application of these cells in the treatment of cardiovascular disease which is especially prevalent in the elderly.
Genetic, epigenetic and posttranslational mechanisms of aging.
Gerontological experimentation is and was always strongly influenced by "theories". The early decades of molecular genetics inspired deterministic thinking, based on the "Central Dogma" (DNA --&gt; RNA --&gt; Proteins). With the progress of detailed knowledge of gene-function a much more complicated picture emerged. Regulation of gene-expression turned out to be a highly complicated process. Experimental gerontology produced over the last decades several "paradigms" incompatible with simple genetic determinism. The increasing number of such detailed experimental "facts" revealed the importance of epigenetic factors and of posttranslational modifications in the age-dependent decline of physiological functions. We shall present in this review a short but critical analysis of genetic and epigenetic processes applied to the interpretation of the more and more precisely elucidated experimental paradigms of aging followed by some of the most relevant aging-mechanisms at the post-translational level, the posttranslational modifications of proteins such as the Maillard reaction, the proteolytic production of harmful peptides and the molecular mechanisms of the aging of elastin with the role of the age-dependent uncoupling of the elastin receptor, as well as the loss of several other receptors. We insist also on the well documented influence of posttranslational modifications on gene expression and on the role of non-coding RNA-s. Altogether, these data replace the previous simplistic concepts on gene action as related to aging by a much more complicated picture, where epigenetic and posttranslational processes together with environmentally influenced genetic pathways play key-roles in aging and strongly influence gene expression.
Topographic and age-related changes of the retinal epithelium and Bruch's membrane of rhesus monkeys.
To examine structural differences in the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) and Bruch's membrane of rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) as a function of topography and age.
The retinas of two old (24 and 26 years old) and two young (1 and 6 years old) female monkeys were examined by light fluorescence and electron microscopy at the macula, equator, and ora serrata.
All monkeys lacked fluorescence and lipofuscin granules in the RPE at the ora serrata where photoreceptors are absent. The equator and macula showed intense fluorescence and many lipofuscin granules in the RPE of the old but not the young monkeys. At the ora, the RPE contained many dense round melanin granules throughout the cell. At the equator and macula, melanin granules were more apical, less frequent, and often elongated. Mitochondria were clustered at the basal side of the RPE cell near infolds of the plasma membrane. Both mitochondria and infolds tended to increase toward the macula. In all regions, the basal lamina of the RPE did not penetrate the extracellular space adjacent to infolds. The elastin layer of Bruch's membrane was wide at the ora and equator and thinner at the macula. In the old monkeys, drusen were found at all retinal regions between the basal lamina and the internal collagen layer of Bruch's membrane. The drusen were often membrane-bound with a basal lamina and contained material resembling structures in the RPE.
Lack of fluorescence and lipofuscin in the RPE at the ora serrata, where photoreceptors are absent, confirms that RPE fluorescence occurs only where outer segments are phagocytized. Mitochondrial clustering indicates that the basal side of the RPE cell uses the most energy and this becomes maximal at the macula. The presence of age-related degenerative changes and drusen at all retinal locations in the older monkeys, even at the ora where RPE lipofuscin was absent, indicates that these processes are not dependent on local lipofuscin accumulation. Therefore lipofuscin toxicity may not be the sole cause of age-related RPE degeneration.
Senescent expression of genes coding tropoelastin, elastase, lysyl oxidase, and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases in rat vocal folds: comparison with skin and lungs.
Histology studies indicate that vocal elastin content accumulates with age, suggesting possible contribution of elastin to age-associated voice changes. However, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. Using a reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), mRNA levels of tropoelastin, elastase, lysyl oxidase, and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP-1 to TIMP-4) were measured in vocal folds, tail skin, and lungs of rats at ages 1.5 +/- 0.5 weeks (neonatal), 6.0 +/- 0.5 months (adult), and 24 +/- 0.5 months (elderly). Vocal expression of both tropoelastin and lysyl oxidase peaks during the neonatal stage, followed by a significant decrease. Gene expression for elastase in the vocal folds of adult rats is not dissimilar to the neonatal levels. The levels in the elderly rots, however, show marked increase, to as much as 201% of the neonatal levels (p &lt; .05). On the other hand, there is no conspicuous age-dependent variation in vocal expression of TIMPs. Gene expression of tropoelastin was similar in rat skin, lung, and vocal folds. In summary, compared to what is found in adult rats, there is a significant up-regulation in the expression of vocal elastase in the elderly animals in the presence of unchanged vocal expression of tropoelastin, lysyl oxidase, and TIMPs. As senescence occurs in both adult and elderly rats, tropoelastin and elastase expression are most affected. Gene expression for proteins affecting the amount of elastin in the vocal fold extracellular matrix does vary with age. These results may not be directly applicable to humans, because biomechanical forces experienced by human folds are likely different than those experienced by rats. However, in the absence of biomechanical forces experienced by humans, rat lungs, skin, and vocal folds display similar profiles of expression of genes coding the above-mentioned molecules. Similar profiles of expression for elastin genes across different tissue types not sharing similar environments suggests a common mechanism influencing senescence of these tissues. Human folds likely share a common similar mechanism of senescence with other organ systems, although organ-specific factors (oscillation, mechanical forces) are also likely operating.
Effect of maternal undernutrition on vascular expression of micro and messenger RNA in newborn and aging offspring.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 1000 W. Carson Street, Torrance, CA 90502, USA. okhorram@obgyn.humc.edu
The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that maternal undernutrition (MUN) alters offspring vascular expression of micro-RNAs (miRNAs), which, in turn, could regulate the expression of a host of genes involved with angiogenesis and extracellular matrix remodeling. The expression of miRNA and mRNA in the same aortic specimens in 1-day-old (P1) and 12-mo-old offspring aortas of dams, which had 50% food restriction from gestation day 10 to term, was determined by specific rat miRNA and DNA arrays. MUN significantly downregulated the expression of miRNAs 29c, 183, and 422b in the P1 group and 200a, 129, 215, and 200b in the 12-mo group, and upregulated the expression of miRNA 189 in the P1 group and 337 in the 12-mo group. The predicted target genes of the miRNAs altered in the two age groups fell into the categories of: 1) structural genes, such as collagen, elastin, and enzymes involved in ECM remodeling; and 2) angiogenic factors. MUN primarily altered the expression of mRNAs in the functional category of cell cycle/mitosis in the P1 group and anatomic structure and apoptosis in the 12-mo age group. Several of the predicted target genes of miRNAs altered in response to MUN were identified by the DNA array including integrin-beta(1) in the P1 aortas and stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 in the 12-mo age groups. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that MUN modulation of offspring gene expression may be mediated in part by a miRNA mechanism.
Marked longevity of human lung parenchymal elastic fibers deduced from prevalence of D-aspartate and nuclear weapons-related radiocarbon.
Normal structure and function of the lung parenchyma depend upon elastic fibers. Amorphous elastin is biochemically stable in vitro, and may provide a metabolically stable structural framework for the lung parenchyma. To test the metabolic stability of elastin in the normal human lung parenchyma, we have (a) estimated the time elapsed since the synthesis of the protein through measurement of aspartic acid racemization and (b) modeled the elastin turnover through measurement of the prevalence of nuclear weapons-related 14C. Elastin purified by a new technique from normal lung parenchyma was hydrolyzed; then the prevalences of D-aspartate and 14C were measured by gas chromatography and accelerator-mass spectrometry, respectively. D-aspartate increased linearly with age; Kasp (1.76 x 10(-3) yr(-1) was similar to that previously found for extraordinarily stable human tissues, indicating that the age of lung parenchymal elastin corresponded with the age of the subject. Radiocarbon prevalence data also were consistent with extraordinary metabolic stability of elastin; the calculated mean carbon residence time in elastin was 74 yr (95% confidence limits, 40-174 yr). These results indicate that airspace enlargement characteristic of "aging lung" is not associated with appreciable new synthesis of lung parenchymal elastin. The present study provides the first tissue-specific evaluation of turnover of an extracellular matrix component in humans and underscores the potential importance of elastin for maintenance of normal lung structure. Most importantly, the present work provides a foundation for strategies to directly evaluate extracellular matrix injury and repair in diseases of lung (especially pulmonary emphysema), vascular tissue, and skin.
arNOX: generator of reactive oxygen species in the skin and sera of aging individuals subject to external modulation.
An aging-related cell-surface oxidase (aging-related NADH oxidase, arNOX) generating superoxide and other reactive oxygen species is shed from the cell surface and is found in saliva, urine, perspiration, and interstitial fluids that surround the collagen and elastin matrix underlying dermis. arNOX activity correlates with age and reaches a maximum at about age 65 in males and 55 in females. arNOX activities are highly correlated with values of human skin where a causal relationship is indicated. Ongoing efforts focus on cloning arNOX proteins and development of antiaging formulas based on arNOX inhibition (intervention).
Relaxin therapy reverses large artery remodeling and improves arterial compliance in senescent spontaneously hypertensive rats.
Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, St Kilda Road Central, Melbourne, PO Box 6492, Victoria 8008, Australia.
Hypertension and aging are associated with large artery structural remodeling and stiffening, which are known to increase cardiovascular risk. Relaxin is a peptide hormone with potent antifibrotic action in multiple organs. Although relaxin is able to reduce peripheral vascular resistance and improve arterial compliance in rats, it remains unclear whether the improvement in compliance is indirectly attributed to a vasodilatory action or whether relaxin is able to reverse arterial remodeling and stiffening directly in aged hypertensive animals. Senescent spontaneously hypertensive rats (17 months old) were treated with relaxin for 2 weeks (0.5 mg/kg per day) followed by a 1-week washout period. We determined large artery compliance using in vivo and in vitro techniques and quantified arterial remodeling by morphological and chemical means. Relaxin therapy significantly reversed aortic remodeling (ie, increases in vessel size, wall thickness, and collagen content) and improved arterial compliance, effects independent of its vasodilatory action. In relaxin-treated spontaneously hypertensive rats, arterial collagen content showed a greater reduction (-31%; P&lt;0.05) than that of elastin (-8%), resulting in an increased elastin:collagen ratio (0.63+/-0.03 versus 0.47+/-0.02; P&lt;0.05). In conclusion, our results demonstrated that relaxin is potent in mediating reversal of arterial remodeling and improving arterial structural compliance in aged hypertensive rats.
Age-related morphologic changes in the human tympanic membrane. A light and electron microscopic study.
To our knowledge, the normal changes that occur in the tympanic membrane after birth have not been described, despite several reports that their otoscopic appearance in healthy, full-term infants is different from that in adults. To provide such a description, the tympanic membranes of 54 temporal bones that had no pathologic evidence of otologic diseases, from patients aged 33 weeks' gestation to 91 years, were examined with light or electron microscopy. The changes encountered in thickness, cellularity, vascularity, collagen, and elastin indicated beyond the first year of life and into old age.
Aged, 80 and over
Changes in aortic stiffness related to elastic fiber network anomalies in the Brown Norway rat during maturation and aging.
Challande P
Adult Brown Norway (BN) rats exhibit numerous internal elastic lamina (IEL) ruptures in the abdominal aorta (AA) and a lower aortic elastin-to-collagen ratio (E/C) compared with other strains. We studied here AA mechanical properties in BN compared with control strains. AA stiffness (assessed by plotting elastic modulus/wall-stress curves obtained under anesthesia), thoracic aorta elastin and collagen contents, and IEL ruptures in AA were measured in male BN and LOU rats aged 6, 10, and 15 wk. The Long Evans (LE) control strain was compared with BN at more advanced ages (15, 28, and 64 wk). At all ages, aortic E/C was lower in BN than in control strains. At 6 wk, AA stiffness was greater in BN than in LOU. In both strains, AA stiffness decreased between 6 and 10 wk, more so in BN than in LOU, and then increased, reaching similar values at 15 wk. BN AA stiffness was not different from that of LE at 15 and 28 wk, but was significantly lower at 64 wk. The increased stiffness in young BN rat AA may be due to the decreased E/C. IEL rupture onset in the BN around 7-8 wk, which decreases stiffness, as suggested by its pharmacological modulation, abolished such differences by 15 wk. Thereafter, age-related AA stiffness increased less in BN than in LE, likely due to the numerous IEL ruptures. We conclude that, in the BN rat, the lower E/C and the presence of IEL ruptures have opposing effects on arterial stiffness.
Relative contributions of age and atherosclerosis to vascular stiffness.
To determine the relative contributions of aging and atherosclerosis to vascular stiffness, we studied aortic stiffness, plaque, and elastin in 8-, 16-, 25-, and 34-week-old male ApoE-KO and C57BL/6J control mice (N = 48). Stiffness increased gradually in both strains up to 25 weeks (p &lt; 0.05), and dramatically between 25 and 34 weeks in ApoE-KO (p &lt; 0.001). Aging ApoE-KO demonstrated increased plaque (p = 0.02), medial thickening (p &lt; 0.001), and severe elastin fragmentation (p &lt; 0.001). We conclude that the contribution of aging to vascular stiffness is relatively minor compared with the influence of atherosclerosis. However, the effect of atherosclerosis on stiffness is significant only with advanced stages of plaque formation.
Direct inhibition of elastase and matrixmetalloproteinases and stimulation of biosynthesis of fibrillar collagens, elastin, and fibrillins by xanthohumol.
In skin aging there is deterioration of the extracellular matrix's collagen and elastin fibers, from its reduced biosynthesis and increased degradation by elastase and matrixmetalloproteinases (MMPs). Xanthohumol is a flavonoid isolated from the hop plant Humulus lupulus L., with anti-microbial, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anti-carcinogenic properties. The goal of this research was to investigate xanthohumol as an anti-skinaging agent via its beneficial regulation of the extracellular matrix. To this purpose, we examined the direct effect of xanthohumol on the activities of elastase and MMPs (MMPs 1, 2, and 9) and its effect on the expression (protein and/or transcription levels) of collagens (types I, III, and V), elastin, and fibrillins (1 and 2) in dermal fibroblasts. Xanthohumol significantly inhibited elastase and MMP-9 activities from its lowest concentration, and MMP-1 and MMP-2 at its higher concentrations, which implies a greater protective effect on elastin. It dramatically increased the expression of types I, III, and V collagens, and elastin, fibrillin-1, and fibrillin-2 in dermal fibroblasts. The effects were similar to those of ascorbic acid. This is the first report identifying xanthohumol's potential to improve skin structure and firmness: it simultaneously inhibits the activities of elastase/MMPs and stimulates the biosynthesis of fibrillar collagens, elastin, and fibrillins.
Characterization of physical properties and histologic evaluation of injectable Dermicol-p35 porcine-collagen dermal filler.
Lorenc Aesthetic Plastic Surgery and ColBar LifeScience Ltd., New York, NY 10028, USA. lorenc@lorenc.com
Injectable dermal fillers have become important alternatives to traditional surgical procedures for the correction of facial wrinkles and restoration of facial volume. The physical properties of a dermal filler/volumizing agent, and the host tissue response to the agent, influence its clinical performance and patient outcomes.
In this study, several key physical properties of the new porcine collagen dermal filler Dermicol-P35 27G were measured and compared with those of commercially available hyaluronic acid-based dermal fillers. Furthermore, the in vivo properties of implanted Dermicol-P35 27G were evaluated by histologic and histopathologic methods.
This study found that Dermicol-P35 27G provides a lower extrusion force profile and yield point compared with the hyaluronic acid-based dermal fillers tested. At 2 years, staining of punch biopsy specimens with hematoxylin and eosin and Herovici stains revealed no inflammatory cells and no evidence of other adverse events in any of the samples containing Dermicol-P35 27G. Within-implant colonization by fibroblasts depositing new collagen and the formation of elastin within the implanted collagen material (as shown by Luna staining) suggest that Dermicol-P35 27G is a bioactive implant.
Compared with several hyaluronic acid-based dermal fillers, Dermicol-P35 exhibited lower extrusion force, higher viscosity under low shear rate, and a higher modulus of elasticity. Results of histologic evaluation indicated that Dermicol-P35 27G did not elicit an inflammatory response and was well integrated within the host tissue. Together, these results suggest that Dermicol-P35 27G offers several advantages that may result in improved clinical experiences for both patients and clinicians.
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
Photoageing of human skin due to chronic exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is characterized histologically by extensive remodelling of the dermal elastic fibre system. Whilst enzymatic pathways are thought to play a major role in mediating extracellular matrix (ECM) degeneration in UV-exposed skin, the substrate specificity of UVR-up-regulated and activated matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) is low. It is unclear, therefore, how such cell-mediated mechanisms alone could be responsible for the reported selective degradation of elastic fibre components such as fibrillin-1 and fibulin-5 during the early stages of photoageing. Here we use atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) to demonstrate that physiologically attainable doses (20-100 mJ/cm(2)) of direct UV-B radiation can induce profound, dose-dependent, changes in the structure of, and mass distribution within, isolated fibrillin microfibrils. Furthermore, using reducing and native PAGE in combination with AFM, we show that, whilst exposure to low-dose UV-B radiation significantly alters the macromolecular and quaternary structures of both UV chromophore (Cys, His, Phe, Trp and Tyr)-rich fibrillin microfibrils (fibrillin-1, 21.0%) and fibronectin dimers (fibronectin, 12.9%), similar doses have no detectable effect on UV chromophore-poor type I collagen monomers (2.2%). Analysis of the published primary amino acid sequences of 49 dermal ECM components demonstrates that most elastic fibre-associated proteins, but crucially neither elastin nor members of the collagen family, are rich in UV chromophores. We suggest, therefore, that the amino acid composition of elastic fibre-associated proteins [including the fibrillins, fibulins, latent TGFbeta binding proteins (LTBPs) and the lysyl oxidase family of enzymes (LOK/LOXLs)] may predispose them to direct degradation by UVR. As a consequence, this selective acellular photochemical pathway may play an important role in initiating and/or exacerbating cell-mediated ECM remodelling in UVR-exposed skin.
Topically applied vitamin C enhances the mRNA level of collagens I and III, their processing enzymes and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 1 in the human dermis.
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is a cofactor required for the function of several hydroxylases and monooxygenases. It is not synthesized in humans and some other animal species and has to be provided by diet or pharmacologic means. Its absence is responsible for scurvy, a condition related in its initial phases to a defective synthesis of collagen by the reduced function of prolylhydroxylase and production of collagen polypeptides lacking hydroxyproline, therefore, they are unable to assemble into stable triple-helical collagen molecules. In fibroblast cultures, vitamin C also stimulates collagen production by increasing the steady-state level of mRNA of collagen types I and III through enhanced transcription and prolonged half-life of the transcripts. The aim of the experimental work has been to evaluate the effect on dermal cells of a preparation of vitamin C topically applied on one side vs placebo on the other side of the dorsal face of the upper forearm of postmenopausal women. Biopsies were collected on both sides and the level of mRNA measured by non competitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction made quantitative by the simultaneous transcription and amplification of synthetic RNA used as internal standards. The mRNA of collagen type I and type III were increased to a similar extent by vitamin C and that of three post-translational enzymes, the carboxy- and amino-procollagen proteinases and lysyloxidase similarly increased. The mRNA of decorin was also stimulated, but elastin, and fibrillin 1 and 2 were not modified by the vitamin. The expression of matrix metalloproteinases 1, 2, and 9 was not significantly changed, but an increased level of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 1 mRNA was observed without modification of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 2 mRNA. The stimulating activity of topical vitamin C was most conspicuous in the women with the lowest dietary intake of the vitamin and unrelated to the level of actinic damage. The results indicate that the functional activity of the dermal cells is not maximal in postmenopausal women and can be increased.
Randomized Controlled Trial
Racemization of aspartyl (Asp) residues in peptides and proteins has been considered to be a nonenzymatic chemical reaction which occurs via succinimide formation. However, it has not been known yet what conditions in living body accelerate the inversion of the L- to the D-form. Here, we examined the effect of ultraviolet (UV) exposure or oxidative stress on the formation of D-Asp residues in the elastin mimic peptides with or without heat treatment. As a result, UV exposure did not affect the D-Asp formation in peptides. On the other hand, the amount of D-Asp in heat-treated peptide solution at the same time as addition of HO(.) radical, H(2)O(2), and lipid peroxide was significantly increased. These results indicate that the inversion rate to D-form of Asp residues in skin elastin is accelerated by generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and that oxidative stress might be closely related to D-Asp formation in aging proteins.
Department of Pathology and Bioresource Center for Geriatric Research, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan. sawabe@tmig.or.jp
The large and medium-sized arteries in elderly people show varying degrees of intimal and medial change. The medial change is known as age-related medial degeneration and sclerosis (ARMDS). The ARMDS results in systolic hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy of the heart as a result of loss of arterial elasticity. It also causes aortic dilatation, or even aortic aneurysm. The ARMDS and atherosclerosis are distinct entities, but are often overlapped and confused with each other. The present review mainly focuses on ARMDS and briefly addresses atherosclerosis, and aging of arterioles, capillaries and veins. The smooth muscle cells in the inner half of the aortic media of elderly people degenerate and undergo apoptosis. This causes degradation of elastin fibers and the accumulation of collagen fibers in the media, but the inflammatory infiltrates are scarce. Biochemical studies showed an age-related decrease of elastin and its crosslinks, and an increase of collagen and its crosslink. Because the turnover of elastin is very long, it likely suffers from glycation (Maillard reaction) and glyco-oxidative reaction. The advanced glycation end-products accumulate in the aortic media with increasing age. Alcian-blue positive mucin accumulates in aortic media in elderly people. The major component of the increase of aortic mucin is chondroitin-6-sulfate. Microcalcification is frequent in the inner acellular portion of the aortic media in elderly people. Calcium contents increase with age. In conclusion, the ARMDS is a distinct pathological entity with clinical significance. The pathogenesis of ARMDS is unclear; the mechanical stress of elastin, endothelial dysfunction, and glycation of elastin are proposed.
Biomechanical and microstructural properties of common carotid arteries from fibulin-5 null mice.
Alteration in the mechanical properties of arteries occurs with aging and disease, and arterial stiffening is a key risk factor for subsequent cardiovascular events. Arterial stiffening is associated with the loss of functional elastic fibers and increased collagen content in the wall of large arteries. Arterial mechanical properties are controlled largely by the turnover and reorganization of key structural proteins and cells, a process termed growth and remodeling. Fibulin-5 (fbln5) is a microfibrillar protein that binds tropoelastin, interacts with integrins, and localizes to elastin fibers; tropoelastin and microfibrillar proteins constitute functional elastic fibers. We performed biaxial mechanical testing and confocal imaging of common carotid arteries (CCAs) from fibulin-5 null mice (fbln5 ⁻(/)⁻) and littermate controls (fbln5 (+/+)) to characterize the mechanical behavior and microstructural content of these arteries; mechanical testing data were fit to a four-fiber family constitutive model. We found that CCAs from fbln5 ⁻(/)⁻ mice exhibited lower in vivo axial stretch and lower in vivo stresses while maintaining a similar compliance over physiological pressures compared to littermate controls. Specifically, for fbln5 ⁻(/)⁻ the axial stretch λ = 1.41 ± 0.07, the circumferential stress σ(θ) = 101 ± 32 kPa, and the axial stress σ ( z ) = 74 ± 28 kPa; for fbln5 (+/+) λ = 1.64 ± 0.03, σ(θ) = 194 ± 38 kPa, and σ(z) = 159 ± 29 kPa. Structurally, CCAs from fbln5 ⁻(/)⁻ mice lack distinct functional elastic fibers defined by the lamellar structure of alternating layers of smooth muscle cells and elastin sheets. These data suggest that structural differences in fbln5 ⁻(/)⁻ arteries correlate with significant differences in mechanical properties. Despite these significant differences fbln5 ⁻(/)⁻ CCAs exhibited nearly normal levels of cyclic strain over the cardiac cycle.
Elastometry and clinical results after bipolar radiofrequency treatment of skin.
Laser and Skin Surgery Center of Northern California, Sacramento, California, USA. andrea.willey@mac.com
The healing process of a novel radiofrequency bipolar system was recently shown to produce a profound increase in collagen and elastin content.
To determine the relationship between subjective clinical improvement scores and changes in objective measures of mechanical skin properties.
Elastometry measurements were made at baseline and 3 months after treatment. All patients received a treatment zone on the lower face. Patient assessments of results and physician ratings of wrinkle and skin laxity were collected at baseline and 3 and 6 months after treatment. Elastometry and clinical results were then compared.
Three months after treatment, elastometry measurements showed statistically significant improvement (5-12% decrease in Young's Modulus and 10-16% decrease in retraction time). The average improvement correlated to a 2.6-year improvement in skin property. Physician scores at 3 months showed a statistically significant improvement of 1.42 grades on the Fitzpatrick scale for wrinkles and 0.66 grades on the Alexiades scale for skin laxity, increasing to 1.57 and 0.70 improvement, respectively, at 6 months. Eighty-nine percent and 91% of patients were satisfied or very satisfied with the procedure at 3- and 6-month follow-up, respectively.
Elastometry data showed an average decrease in Young's Modulus and retraction time, both of which suggest that radiofrequency bipolar treatment resulted in more youthful skin. Better mechanical characteristics were consistent with improvements in wrinkles, laxity, and skin quality and appearance.
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
Nutrition and aging skin: sugar and glycation.
The effect of sugars on aging skin is governed by the simple act of covalently cross-linking two collagen fibers, which renders both of them incapable of easy repair. Glucose and fructose link the amino acids present in the collagen and elastin that support the dermis, producing advanced glycation end products or "AGEs." This process is accelerated in all body tissues when sugar is elevated and is further stimulated by ultraviolet light in the skin. The effect on vascular, renal, retinal, coronary, and cutaneous tissues is being defined, as are methods of reducing the glycation load through careful diet and use of supplements.
On constitutive descriptors of the biaxial mechanical behaviour of human abdominal aorta and aneurysms.
The abdominal aorta (AA) in older individuals can develop an aneurysm, which is of increasing concern in our ageing population. The structural integrity of the ageing aortic wall, and hence aneurysm, depends primarily on effective elastin and multiple families of oriented collagen fibres. In this paper, we show that a structurally motivated phenomenological 'four-fibre family' constitutive relation captures the biaxial mechanical behaviour of both the human AA, from ages less than 30 to over 60, and abdominal aortic aneurysms. Moreover, combining the statistical technique known as non-parametric bootstrap with a modal clustering method provides improved confidence intervals for estimated best-fit values of the eight associated constitutive parameters. It is suggested that this constitutive relation captures the well-known loss of structural integrity of elastic fibres owing to ageing and the development of abdominal aneurysms, and that it provides important insight needed to construct growth and remodelling models for aneurysms, which in turn promise to improve our ability to predict disease progression.
A novel anti-ageing mechanism for retinol: induction of dermal elastin synthesis and elastin fibre formation.
The Johnson &amp; Johnson Skin Research Center, Consumer Product Worldwide, A Unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson Consumer Companies, Inc., 199 Grandview Road, Skillman, NJ 08558, USA.
Dermal elastic fibres are extracellular matrix protein complexes produced by fibroblasts and involved in skin elasticity. Elastin fibres decrease with age as a result of reduced synthesis and increased degradation, resulting in skin sagging and reduced skin elasticity. In this study, we show that retinol (ROL), known to enhance dermal collagen production, is also enhancing elastin fibre formation. ROL induced elastin gene expression and elastin fibre formation in cultured human dermal fibroblasts. Topical treatment of cultured human skin explants with a low dose (0.04%) of ROL increased mRNA and protein levels of tropoelastin and of fibrillin-1, an elastin accessory protein, as documented by QPCR and immunohistochemistry staining. Luna staining confirmed the increased elastin fibre network in the ROL-treated skin explants, as compared with untreated controls. These data demonstrate that ROL exerts its anti-ageing benefits not only via enhanced epidermal proliferation and increased collagen production, but also through an increase in elastin production and assembly.
© 2010 Johnson &amp; Johnson. Journal compilation. © 2010 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Société Française de Cosmétologie.
We tested the hypothesis that carotid artery stiffening with ageing is associated with transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1)-related increases in adventitial collagen and reductions in medial elastin, which would be reversed by voluntary aerobic exercise. Ex vivo carotid artery incremental stiffness was greater in old (29–32 months, n = 11) vs. young (4–7 months, n = 8) cage control B6D2F1 mice (8.84 ± 1.80 vs. 4.54 ± 1.18 AU, P &lt; 0.05), and was associated with selective increases in collagen I and III and TGF-β1 protein expression in the adventitia (P &lt; 0.05), related to an increase in smooth muscle α-actin (SMαA) (myofibroblast phenotype) (P &lt; 0.05). In cultured adventitial fibroblasts, TGF-β1 induced increases in superoxide and collagen I protein (P &lt; 0.05), which were inhibited by Tempol, a superoxide dismutase. Medial elastin was reduced with ageing, accompanied by decreases in the pro-synthetic elastin enzyme, lysyl oxidase, and increases in the elastin-degrading enzyme, matrix metalloproteinase 2. Fibronectin was unchanged with ageing, but there was a small increase in calcification (P &lt; 0.05). Increased incremental stiffness in old mice was completely reversed (3.98 ± 0.34 AU, n = 5) by 10–14 weeks of modest voluntary wheel running (1.13 ± 0.29 km day−1), whereas greater voluntary wheel running (10.62 ± 0.49 km day−1) had no effect on young mice. The amelioration of carotid artery stiffness by wheel running in old mice was associated with reductions in collagen I and III and TGF-β1, partial reversal of the myofibroblast phenotype (reduced SMαA) and reduced calcification (all P &lt; 0.05 vs. old controls), whereas elastin and its modulating enzymes were unaffected. Adventitial TGF-β1-related oxidative stress may play a key role in collagen deposition and large elastic artery stiffening with ageing and the efficacious effects of voluntary aerobic exercise.
Comparison of ex vivo and in vitro human fibroblast ageing models.
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G. Campi 287, Modena, Italy.
Several studies have analyzed modulation of gene expression during physiological ageing with interesting, but often contradictory results, depending on the model used. In the present report we compare age-related metabolic and synthetic parameters in human dermal fibroblasts (HDF) isolated from young and old subjects (ex vivo ageing model) and cultured from early up to late cumulative population doublings (CPD) (in vitro ageing model) in order to distinguish changes induced in vivo by the aged environment and maintained in vitro, from those associated with cell senescence and progressive CPD. Results demonstrate that fibroblasts from aged donors, already at early CPD, exhibit an impaired redox balance, highlighting the importance of this parameter during ageing, even in the presence of standard environmental conditions, which are considered optimal for cell growth. By contrast, several proteins, as those related to heat shock response, or involved in endoplasmic reticulum and membrane trafficking, appeared differentially expressed only during in vitro ageing, suggesting that, at high CPD, the whole cell machinery becomes permanently altered. Finally, given the importance of the elastic component for a long-lasting connective tissue structural and functional compliance, this study focuses also on elastin and fibulin-5 synthesis and deposition, demonstrating a close relationship between fibulin-5 and ageing.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
Aged, 80 and over
Histological evidence for skin rejuvenation using a combination of pneumatic energy, broadband light, and growth factor therapy.
A variety of laser or light-based devices have been developed for skin rejuvenation. This study evaluates the efficacy (at the microscopic level) of a combination of pneumatic energy, broadband light, and profusion tip-delivered epidermal growth factor (EGF).
Healthy adult Japanese volunteers were recruited for this study. The posterior parts of the left and right arms were treated with a device that combines pneumatic energy and broadband light (Isolaz device). The left arms were also treated with EGF through a tip. Each subject received four treatments at 10-day intervals. Biopsy specimens obtained 3 weeks after the second treatment and 3 weeks after the fourth treatment were examined for histological study.
After two treatments, elastin fibers and fibroblasts in the dermal papillary layers of the left arms were increased compared to the right arms. A mean of 173.9 cells positive for proliferating cell nuclear antibody (PCNA) were observed on the left arm compared to 101.0 on the right arm. After the fourth treatment, angiogenesis and increased collagen fibers were observed in the dermal papillary layers of both arms.
Four treatments with the addition of the profusion tip appear to hasten new collagen and elastin fiber formation, and the increase of PCNA positive cells so that dermal remodeling begins at an earlier stage than with the Isolaz alone.
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
Elastin-laminin receptor and abdominal aortic aneurysms. New subject to study? A review.
Department of General and Vascular Surgery, Medical University of Lodz, Poland.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms and their management remain a significant health problem that is likely to assume greater importance with the expansion of the elderly population. Elastin fibres degradation and extracellular matrix remodelling seems to be the basic process in aneurysm formation. Recent investigations revealed the principal role of elastin-laminin receptor in extracellular matrix remodelling in aging and atherosclerosis. The correlation between events observed in animal aneurysm models, human aneurysms and in experiments on elastin-laminin receptor properties was discussed to propose the hypothesis about the role of elastin peptides and elastin-laminin receptor in aortic aneurysm formation.
The effects of retinoid treatment on wrinkling in the hairless mouse can be understood in the context of the repair of the dermal elastosis. The two isomers of retinoic acid do not differ qualitatively in their effects on the histological appearance of the tissue or on the wrinkling patterns produced. The all-trans isomer is slightly more potent in this system than the 13-cis isomer but substantially more irritating, which may limit the maximum degree of repair attainable. The "reconstructed" dermis is thickened, it contains new collagen as a result of the stimulation of gene expression, and the tangled, disorganized elastin is packed into a thin layer in the lower dermis. Thus, the framework within which a wrinkle had been established is eliminated, and the skin assumes a normal state, as observed. That the effacement is apparently permanent is additional evidence of the relationship between the integrity of the elastic fiber network and the surface appearance. The only difference in the repaired skin is the absence of filamentous surface features. The thickening effect of UVB and subsequent retinoid treatment on the epidermis does not contribute substantially to the overall thickness of the repaired skin. Nevertheless, despite having a minor role in the effacement of deep wrinkles, these epidermal changes evidently preclude the formation of fine surface features. The model is a valid one for the repair of photodamaged skin. From what is known about the role of elastin in maintaining skin integrity and from the association of wrinkling with excessive sun exposure, it is encouraging to observe the dual effect of retinoic acids.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Aortic pulse wave velocity (PWV) is an independent determinant of cardiovascular risk. Although aortic stiffening with age is well documented, the interaction between aging and regional aortic PWV is still a debated question. We measured global and regional PWV in the descending aorta of 56 healthy subjects aged 25-76 years using a one-dimensional, interleaved, Fourier velocity encoded pulse sequence with cylindrical excitation. Repeatability across two magnetic resonance examinations (n = 19) and accuracy against intravascular pressure measurements (n = 4) were assessed. The global PWV was found to increase nonlinearly with age. The thoracic aorta was found to stiffen the most with age (PWV [thoracic, 20-40 years] = 4.7 ± 1.1 m/s; PWV [thoracic, 60-80 years] = 7.9 ± 1.5 m/s), followed by the mid- (PWV [mid-abdominal, 20-40 years] = 4.9 ± 1.3 m/s; PWV [mid-abdominal, 60-80 years] = 7.4 ± 1.9 m/s) and distal abdominal aorta (PWV [distal abdominal, 20-40 years] = 4.8 ± 1.4 m/s; PWV [distal abdominal, 60-80 years] = 5.7 ± 1.4 m/s). Good agreement was found between repeated magnetic resonance measurements and between magnetic resonance PWVs and the gold-standard. Fourier velocity encoded M-mode allowed to measure global and regional PWV in the descending aorta. There was a preferential stiffening of the thoracic aorta with age, which may be due to progressive fragmentation of elastin fibers in this region.
Sensitivity and Specificity
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Suppl.
An integral theory of female urinary incontinence. Experimental and clinical considerations.
In this Theory paper, the complex interplay of the specific structures involved in female urinary continence are analyzed. In addition the effects of age, hormones, and iatrogenically induced scar tissue on these structures, are discussed specifically with regard to understanding the proper basis for treatment of urinary incontinence. According to the Theory stress and urge symptoms may both derive, for different reasons from the same anatomical defect, a lax vagina. This laxity may be caused by defects within the vaginal wall itself, or its supporting structures i.e. ligaments, muscles, and their connective tissue insertions. The vagina has a dual function. It mediates (transmits) the various muscle movements involved in bladder neck opening and closure through three separate closure mechanisms. It also has a structural function, and prevents urgency by supporting the hypothesized stretch receptors at the proximal urethra and bladder neck. Altered collagen/elastin in the vaginal connective tissue and/or its ligamentous supports may cause laxity. This dissipates the muscle contraction, causing stress incontinence, and/or activation of an inappropriate micturition reflex, ("bladder instability") by stimulation of bladder base stretch receptors. The latter is manifested by symptoms of frequency, urgency, nocturia with or without urine loss.
Changes in mechanical properties are an essential characteristic of the aging process of human skin. Previous studies attribute these changes predominantly to the altered collagen and elastin organization and density of the extracellular matrix. Here, we show that individual dermal fibroblasts also exhibit a significant increase in stiffness during aging in vivo. With the laser-based optical cell stretcher we examined the viscoelastic biomechanics of dermal fibroblasts isolated from 14 human donors aged 27 to 80. Increasing age was clearly accompanied by a stiffening of the investigated cells. We found that fibroblasts from old donors exhibited an increase in rigidity of ∼60% with respect to cells of the youngest donors. A FACS analysis of the content of the cytoskeletal polymers shows a shift from monomeric G-actin to polymerized, filamentous F-actin, but no significant changes in the vimentin and microtubule content. The rheological analysis of fibroblast-populated collagen gels demonstrates that cell stiffening directly results in altered viscoelastic properties of the collagen matrix. These results identify a new mechanism that may contribute to the age-related impairment of elastic properties in human skin. The altered mechanical behavior might influence cell functions involving the cytoskeleton, such as contractility, motility, and proliferation, which are essential for reorganization of the extracellular matrix.
Aging and arterial stiffness.
Arterial walls stiffen with age. The most consistent and well-reported changes are luminal enlargement with wall thickening and a reduction of elastic properties at the level of large elastic arteries. Longstanding arterial pulsation in the central artery causes elastin fiber fatigue and fracture. Increased vascular calcification and endothelial dysfunction are also characteristic of arterial aging. These changes lead to increased pulse wave velocity, especially along central elastic arteries, and increases in systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure. Vascular aging is accelerated by coexisting cardiovascular risk factors, such as hypertension, metabolic syndrome and diabetes. Vascular aging is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease, from atherosclerosis to target organ damage, including coronary artery disease, stroke and heart failure. Various strategies, especially controlling hypertension, show benefit in preventing, delaying or attenuating vascular aging.
J-STAGE, Japan Science and Technology Information Aggregator, Electronic
Coffea arabica extract and its constituents prevent photoaging by suppressing MMPs expression and MAP kinase pathway.
UV is a potent factor in skin photoaging and photocarcinogenesis. Therefore, investigating the inhibiting mechanisms of photoaging would be useful to enable development of agents to slow down the aging process. UV-irradiation increased metalloproteinase (MMP)-1, -3, and -9 and then causes collagen and elastin degradation, leading to the formation of coarse wrinkles and sagging skin. Polyphenols, a group of compounds, possessing a variety of biological activities including inhibition of MMP-1 and elastase, are widely distributed in plants including Coffea arabica. In this study, Coffea arabica leaves extract (CAE), its hydrolysates (CAH), chlororgenic acid and caffeic acid, are studied for their anti-photoaging effect. Coffea arabica leaves were extracted with methanol, and the extract was hydrolyzed with different concentrations of hydrochloric acid. The various concentrations of CAE, CAH, chlororgenic acid and caffeic acid were subject to MMPs and elastase inhibition tests. The fibroblast was used for collagen synthesis and MMP-1, -3, -9 inhibition tests on herbal extracts. The results showed that CAE stimulated type I procollagen expression, inhibited MMP-1, -3, -9 expression and inhibited the phosphorylation of JNK, ERK and p38. The results suggest that CAE can prevent photo-damage in skin through inhibiting MMP expression and MAP kinase pathway.
In vivo estimation of the contribution of elastin and collagen to the mechanical properties in the human abdominal aorta: effect of age and sex.
Astrand H
Stalhand J
Division of Vascular Surgery, Jönköping Hospital, Jönköping, Sweden. hastrand@live.se
The mechanical properties of the aorta affect cardiac function and are related to cardiovascular morbidity/mortality. This study was designed to evaluate the isotropic (mainly elastin, elastin(iso)) and anisotropic (mainly collagen, collagen(ani)) material parameters within the human aorta in vivo. Thirty healthy men and women in three different age categories (23-30, 41-54, and 67-72 yr) were included. A novel mechanical model was used to identify the mechanical properties and the strain field with aid of simultaneously recorded pressure and radius in the abdominal aorta. The magnitudes of the material parameters relating to both the stiffness of elastin(iso) and collagen(ani) were in agreement with earlier in vitro studies. The load-bearing fraction attributed to collagen(ani) oscillated from 10 to 30% between diastolic and systolic pressures during the cardiac cycle. With age, stiffness of elastin(iso) increased in men, despite the decrease in elastin content that has been found due to elastolysis. Furthermore, an increase in stiffness of collagen(ani) at high physiological pressure was found. This might be due to increased glycation, as well as changed isoforms of collagen in the aortic wall with age. A marked sex difference was observed, with a much less age-related effect, both on elastin(iso) and collagen(ani) stiffness in women. Possible factors of importance could be the effect of sex hormones, as well as differing collagen isoforms, between the sexes.
A novel promising therapy for skin aging: dermal multipotent stem cells against photoaged skin by activation of TGF-β/Smad and p38 MAPK signaling pathway.
Skin photoaging, the most common skin damage, is caused by chronic UV irradiation. It is involved in the reduction, aging and apoptosis of fibroblasts (FBs) as well as the blockage of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β)/Smad and p38 mitogen-actived protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways. Dermal multipotent stem cells (dMSCs) are a population of adult stem cells derived from dermis in recent years. It has been confirmed that dMSCs can activate or differentiate into FBs to participate in wound healing by producing and expressing TGF-β and other cytokines. Considering the mechanism of skin photoaging and the role of dMSCs, we hold a hypothesis that dMSCs may be applied in skin photoaging by activating TGF-β/Smad and p38 MAPK signaling pathways, and then stimulating FBs to secrete and synthesize collagen or elastin, heightening the extracellular matrix, finally eliminating wrinkles and strengthening skin elasticity. These would provide a novel approach for anti-skin photoaging.
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is the most effective protease inhibitor in the fibrinolysis system, and plays an important role in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix. We therefore explored whether PAI-1 is involved in the change of lung structure with increasing age. PAI-1 gene knockout mice and wild-type mice were sacrificed at age 3 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 15 months for histopathology analysis, and assessed the relationship between PAI-1 and the change in lung structure with age. Six-month-old mice were chosen for further studies. Elastin in the lung was detected using Weigert staining. We measured the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-12 (MMP-12) that is a major protease in elastin degradation by real time PCR and immunostaining. Transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) expression was measured by western blot analysis. PAI-1 gene knockout mice showed significant increases in alveolar size with increasing age and damaged alveolar structure at the age of 15 months, compared with wild-type mice. At the age of 6 months, elastin protein was decreased in the lungs of PAI-1 gene knockout mice. PAI-1 null mice had higher MMP-12 mRNA expression, and lower expression level of active TGF-β1 in the lung. Taken together, these results indicate that the emphysema-like change attributed to PAI-1 deficiency might be facilitated with increased MMP-12 expression that accelerates elastin degradation in mice lungs, and TGF-β1 might be involved in the modulation of this process.
J-STAGE, Japan Science and Technology Information Aggregator, Electronic
Significant differences in the material properties between aged human and porcine aortic tissues.
Tissue Mechanics Laboratory, Biomedical Engineering Program and Mechanical Engineering Department, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA.
Currently, percutaneous aortic valve (PAV) replacement devices are being investigated to treat aortic stenosis in patients deemed to be of too high a risk for conventional open-chest surgery. Successful PAV deployment and function are heavily reliant on the tissue-stent interaction. Many PAV feasibility trials have been conducted with porcine models under the assumption that these tissues are similar to human; however, this assumption may not be valid. The goal of this study was to characterize and compare the biomechanical properties of aged human and porcine aortic tissues.
The biaxial mechanical properties of the left coronary sinus, right coronary sinus, non-coronary sinus, and ascending aorta of eight aged human (90.1 ± 6.8 years) and 10 porcine (6-9 months) hearts were quantified. Tissue structure was analyzed via histological techniques.
Aged human aortic tissues were significantly stiffer than the corresponding porcine tissues in both the circumferential and longitudinal directions (p &lt; 0.001). In addition, the nearly linear stress-strain behavior of the porcine tissues, compared with the highly nonlinear response of the human tissues at a low strain range, suggested structural differences between the aortic tissues from these two species. Histological analysis revealed that porcine samples were composed of more elastin and less collagen fibers than the respective human samples.
Significant material and structural differences were observed between the human and porcine tissues, which raise questions on the validity of using porcine models to investigate the biomechanics involved in PAV intervention.
With aging we assist to alterations in the vascular structure and function. One important factor in these vascular wall changes is the degradation of the elastin fibre major protein: elastin. Elastin peptides derived from the degradation are present in human sera. Elastin peptides induce on fibroblasts, phagocytic cells, lymphocytes, smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells, a variety of biological effects mediated by the elastin-laminin receptor which has been demonstrated to be present on the membrane of these cells. The transduction pathway of the ELR receptor involves the activation of phospholipase C (PLC) by a pertussis toxin sensitive G-protein. PLC induces the production of inositol trisphosphate (IP3) leading to the increase of the intracellular free calcium on one hand, and of diacylglycerol (DAG) which stimulates the translocation to the membrane of PKC leading to the phosphorylation of members of the MAPK family, such as p42/p44 MAPK. A progressive age dependent uncoupling of the elastin-laminin receptor occurs impairing its transduction pathway and which results in alteration of the calcium signaling and loss in calcium homeostasis of the cells. These alterations in the signal transduction of the elastin-laminin receptor result in modified activities of parenchymal and phagocytic cells with aging, such as free radical production and elastase release. Thus, these age-related alterations in the elastin-laminin receptor signal transduction may be involved in the atherogenesis.
Electro-optical Synergy Technique: A New and Effective Nonablative Approach to Skin Aging.
Objectives: Electro-optical synergy technology is one of the most recently described methods for nonablative skin rejuvenation. The aim of this study is to evaluate the effects of electro-optical synergy on connective tissue composition by histological and immunohistochemical techniques coupled with computerized morphometric analysis. Design: A prospective clinical study. Participants: Six volunteers with Fitzpatrick skin types 3 to 4 and Glogau class I to II wrinkles were subjected to three months (6 sessions at 2-week intervals) of electro-optical synergy treatment. Measurements: Standard photographs and skin biopsies were obtained at baseline as well as three and six months after the start of treatment. The authors performed quantitative evaluation of total elastin, tropoelastin, collagen types I, III, and VII, and newly synthesized collagen. Results: Noticeable clinical and histological improvement was observed after electro-optical synergy treatment. A statistically significant increase in the means of collagen types I, III, and VII, as well as newly synthesized collagen, together with increased levels of tropoelastin, were detected, while the mean level of total elastin was significantly decreased at the end of treatment and three months post-treatment. Conclusion: Electro-optical synergy is an effective treatment for contouring facial skin laxity. This modality stimulates the repair processes and reverses the clinical, as well as the histopathological, signs of aging with the advantage of being a relatively risk-free procedure with minimal patient recovery time.
Carotid artery mechanical properties and stresses quantified using in vivo data from normotensive and hypertensive humans.
The goal of this study was to model the in vivo non-linear mechanical behavior of human common carotid arteries (CCAs) and then to compare wall stresses and associated contributions of micro-constituents in normotensive (NT) and treated hypertensive (HT) subjects. We used an established theoretical model of 3D arterial mechanics that assumes a hyperelastic, anisotropic, active-passive, and residually stressed wall. In vivo data were obtained non-invasively from CCAs in 16 NT (21-64 years old) and 25 treated HT (44-69 years old) subjects. The associated quasi-static boundary value problem was solved semi-analytically over a cardiac cycle while accounting for surrounding perivascular tissue. Best-fit values of model parameters, including those describing contributions by intramural elastin, fibrillar collagen, and vascular smooth muscle, were estimated by a non-linear least-squares method. The model (1) captured temporal changes in intraluminal pressure, (2) estimated wall stress fields that appeared to reflect the presence or absence of age and disease, and (3) suggested changes in mechanical characteristics of wall micro-constituents despite medical treatment of hypertension. For example, age was positively correlated with residual stresses and altered fibrillar collagen in NT subjects, which indirectly validated the modeling, and HT subjects had higher levels of stresses, increased smooth muscle tone, and a stiffer elastin-dominated matrix despite treatment. These results are consistent with prior reports on effects of age and hypertension, but provide increased insight into evolving contributions of cell and matrix mechanics to arterial behavior in vivo.
Multiple therapies involving ablative and nonablative techniques have been developed for rejuvenation of photodamaged skin. Monopolar radiofrequency (RF) is emerging as a gentler, nonablative skin-tightening device that delivers uniform heat to the dermis at a controlled depth.
We evaluated the clinical effects and objectively quantified the histologic changes of the nonablative RF device in the treatment of photoaging.
Six individuals of Fitzpatrick skin type III to IV and Glogau class I to II wrinkles were subjected to 3 months of treatment (6 sessions at 2-week intervals). Standard photographs and skin biopsy specimens were obtained at baseline, and at 3 and 6 months after the start of treatment. We performed quantitative evaluation of total elastin, collagen types I and III, and newly synthesized collagen using computerized histometric and immunohistochemical techniques. Blinded photographs were independently scored for wrinkle improvement.
RF produced noticeable clinical results, with high satisfaction and corresponding facial skin improvement. Compared with the baseline, there was a statistically significant increase in the mean of collagen types I and III, and newly synthesized collagen, while the mean of total elastin was significantly decreased, at the end of treatment and 3 months posttreatment.
Although the results may not be as impressive as those obtained by ablative treatments, RF is a promising treatment option for photoaging with fewer side effects and downtime.
See the articles recommended by F1000Prime's Faculty of more than 5,000 expert scientists and clinical researchers. - Faculty of 1000
Granzyme B contributes to extracellular matrix remodeling and skin aging in apolipoprotein E knockout mice.
Apolipoprotein E knockout (apoE-KO) mice have been utilized for decades as a model of atherosclerosis. However, in addition to atherosclerosis, apoE-KO mice develop extensive cutaneous xanthomatosis, accelerated skin aging and frailty when fed a high fat diet. Granzyme B (GrB) is a pro-apoptotic serine protease that has recently been shown to exhibit extracellular proteolytic activity in certain pathologies. In the present study, the role of GrB in skin aging and pathology was assessed using the apoE-KO model of skin aging. Male C57BL/6 wild type and apoE-KO mice were grown for 0, 5, 15 or 30 weeks on either a high fat (21.2% fat, 0.2% cholesterol) or regular chow diet (7% fat). ApoE/GrB double knockout (DKO) mice were also generated and assessed after being fed either diet for 30 weeks. Skin was removed from the mid to lower back and examined for age-related changes such as hair loss, skin thinning and collagen remodeling and disorganization. ApoE-KO mice exhibited signs of frailty, hair graying, hair loss, skin thinning, loss of collagen density and increased skin pathologies featuring collagen remodeling and reduced decorin compared to wild type controls. These phenotypes occurred earlier and were more severe when fed a high fat diet. In addition, we also observed increased GrB expression in proximity to areas of decorin degradation and reduced collagen density in the skin of apoE-KO mice. DKO mice exhibited protection against skin thinning, ECM degradation and loss of dermal collagen density. In summary, our results provide novel insights into the effects of a high fat diet and apoE deficiency on skin aging and pathology and suggest a role for GrB in age-related skin thinning and frailty.
A multi-layered computational model of coupled elastin degradation, vasoactive dysfunction, and collagenous stiffening in aortic aging.
Arterial responses to diverse pathologies and insults likely occur via similar mechanisms. For example, many studies suggest that the natural process of aging and isolated systolic hypertension share many characteristics in arteries, including loss of functional elastin, decreased smooth muscle tone, and altered rates of deposition, and/or crosslinking of fibrillar collagen. Our aim is to show computationally how these coupled effects can impact evolving aortic geometry and mechanical behavior. Employing a thick-walled, multi-layered constrained mixture model, we suggest that a coupled loss of elastin and vasoactive function are fundamental mechanisms by which aortic aging occurs. Moreover, it is suggested that collagenous stiffening, although itself generally an undesirable process, can play a key role in attenuating excessive dilatation, perhaps including the enlargement of abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Centre for Vision and Vascular Science, School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom.
Human sclera and Bruch's membrane were dissected from postmortem eyes (n = 67) across a wide age range (33-92 years) and were probed by Raman spectroscopy. The biochemical composition, AGEs, and their age-related trends were determined from data reduction of the Raman spectra and compared for the two tissues.
Raman microscopy demonstrated that Bruch's membrane and sclera are composed of a similar range of biomolecules but with distinct relative quantities, such as in the heme/collagen and the elastin/collagen ratios. Both tissues accumulated AGEs, and these correlated with chronological age (R(2) = 0.824 and R(2) = 0.717 for sclera and Bruch's membrane, respectively). The sclera accumulated AGE adducts at a lower rate than Bruch's membrane, and the models of overall age-related changes exhibited a lower rate (one-fourth that of Bruch's membrane) but a significant increase with age (P &lt; 0.05).
The results suggest that the sclera is a viable surrogate marker for estimating AGE accumulation in Bruch's membrane and for reliably predicting chronological age. These findings also suggest that sclera could be a useful target tissue for future patient-based, Raman spectroscopy studies.
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA. blyuminmd@gmail.com
To determine the safety and efficacy of an infrared device to treat upper arm laxity in aged skin.
Twenty women with mild to very loose aged upper arm skin underwent two treatments with an infrared device 1 month apart. Nineteen patients completed the study with a 3-month follow-up. Outcome measures included investigator and participant evaluations of skin laxity improvement, blinded photographic assessments of skin tightening, and differences in circumferences and spectrophotometric analysis of collagen content in the treated arms. Two patients participated in histological evaluations.
The patient and investigator clinical assessments showed minimal improvement in skin laxity. There was a statistically significant decrease in arm circumference. Blinded photographic assessments and spectrophotometric analysis revealed no statistical improvement in skin laxity. The immediate post-treatment histological evaluations showed architectural disarray of dermal collagen and elastin.
An infrared device is safe, well tolerated, and minimally effective in treating aged upper arm skin laxity.
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
Central Arterial Aging and Angiotensin II Signaling.
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Science, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
Arterial remodeling over time is a cornerstone of normal systemic aging. The age-associated arterial structural and functional changes in the intima, the media, and the adventitia are closely linked to angiotensin II (Ang II) signaling. A growing line of evidence indicates that essential elements of Ang II signaling, which encompasses milk fat globule epidermal growth factor-8, calpain-1, transforming growth factor-β1, matrix metalloproteinase-2/9, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-oxidase, and reactive oxygen species, are upregulated within the central arterial wall in rats, nonhuman primates, and humans during aging. In vitro studies show that the elevation of Ang II signaling induces the accumulation of collagen and advanced glycated end-products, the degradation of elastin, and the increased cell cycle disorder, invasion, and hypertrophy of endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells. Further, in vivo studies demonstrate that increased Ang II signaling accelerates arterial aging. Conversely, attenuating Ang II signaling via an inhibition of angiotensin conversing enzyme or a blockade of AT1 activation retards age-associated arterial remodeling. This review attempts to integrate complex facts of Ang II signaling within the aged central arterial wall and may shed light on new therapeutic targets for arterial aging.
Fibrillin-1, the major component of extracellular microfibrils that associate with insoluble elastin in elastic fibres, is mainly synthesized during development and postnatal growth and is believed to guide elastogenesis. Mutations in the fibrillin-1 gene cause Marfan syndrome, a multisystem disorder characterized by aortic aneurysms and dissections. The recent finding that early deficiency of elastin modifies vascular ageing has raised the possibility that fibrillin-1 deficiency could also contribute to late-onset pathology of vascular remodelling. To address this question, we examined cardiovascular function in 3-week-old, 6-month-old, and 24-month-old mice that are heterozygous for a hypomorphic structural mutation of fibrillin-1 (Fbn1{+/mgΔ} mice). Our results indicate that Fbn1{+/mgΔ} mice, particularly those that are 24 months old, are slightly more hypotensive than wild-type littermates. Additionally, aneurysm and aortic insufficiency were more frequently observed in ageing Fbn1{+/mgΔ}$ mice than in the wild-type counterparts. We also noted substantial fragmentation and decreased number of elastic lamellae in the aortic wall of Fbn1{+/mgΔ} mice, which were correlated with an increase in aortic stiffness, a decrease in vasoreactivity, altered expression of elastic fibre-related genes, including fibrillin-1 and elastin, and a decrease in the relative ratio between tissue elastin and collagen. Collectively, our findings suggest that the heterozygous mgΔ mutation accelerates some aspects of vascular ageing and eventually leads to aortic manifestations resembling those of Marfan syndrome. Importantly, our data also indicate that vascular abnormalities in Fbn1{+/mgΔ} mice are opposite to those induced by elastin haploinsufficiency during ageing that affect blood pressure, vascular dimensions, and number of elastic lamellae.
Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.
The organisation of elastin and fibrillins 1 and 2 in the cruciate ligament complex.
Department of Musculoskeletal Biology, Institute of Aging and Chronic disease and School of Veterinary Science, Leahurst Campus, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. k.smith@vet.gla.ac.uk
Although elastin fibres and oxytalan fibres (bundles of microfibrils) have important mechanical, biochemical and cell regulatory functions, neither their distribution nor their function in cruciate ligaments has been investigated. Twelve pairs of cruciate ligaments (CLs) were obtained from 10 adult dogs with no evidence of knee osteoarthritis. Elastic fibres were identified using Verhoeff's and Miller's staining. Fibrillins 1 and 2 were immunolocalised and imaged using confocal laser scanning microscopy. Hydrated, unfixed tissue was analysed using Nomarski differential interference microscopy (NDIC), allowing structural and mechanical analysis. Microfibrils and elastin fibres were widespread in both CLs, predominantly within ligament fascicles, parallel to collagen bundles. Although elastin fibres were sparse, microfibrils were abundant. We described abundant fibres composed of both fibrillin 1 and fibrillin 2, which had a similar pattern of distribution to oxytalan fibres. NDIC demonstrated complex interfascicular and interbundle anatomy in the CL complex. The distribution of elastin fibres is suggestive of a mechanical role in bundle reorganisation following ligament deformation. The presence and location of fibrillin 2 in oxytalan fibres in ligament differs from the solely fibrillin 1-containing oxytalan fibres previously described in tendon and may demonstrate a fundamental difference between ligament and tendon.
© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy © 2011 Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Microdermabrasion: a clinical and histopathologic study.
Division of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation, La Jolla, CA, USA. eks999@yahoo.com
To evaluate the clinical and histopathologic effects of microdermabrasion.
Fourteen patients underwent microdermabrasion treatments over 12-14 weeks. Self-rated questionnaires were given before and after the treatment series and were evaluated by a paired t-test. Three of the 14 patients were treated for moderate to severe acne scarring. Acute histologic effects were assessed ex vivo on human abdominal skin. Chronic histopathologic effects were examined in three volunteers who underwent skin biopsies before and after a treatment series on the dorsal forearms.
By patient assessment, there was statistically significant improvement in roughness, mottled pigmentation, and overall improvement of skin appearance, but not in rhytides. Acne scarring sometimes improved, but required deeper ablation. Acutely the stratum corneum was homogenized and focally compacted. Chronically there was epidermal hyperplasia, decreased melanization, and some increase in elastin.
Microdermabrasion improves some aspects of photoaging and select cases of acne scarring.
Cardiovascular disease is one of the leading cause of mortality in the US and especially, coronary artery disease increases with an aging population and increasing obesity. Currently, bypass surgery using autologous vessels, allografts, and synthetic grafts are known as a commonly used for arterial substitutes. However, these grafts have limited applications when an inner diameter of arteries is less than 6 mm due to low availability, thrombotic complications, compliance mismatch, and late intimal hyperplasia. To overcome these limitations, tissue engineering has been successfully applied as a promising alternative to develop small-diameter arterial constructs that are nonthrombogenic, robust, and compliant. Several previous studies have developed small-diameter arterial constructs with tri-lamellar structure, excellent mechanical properties and burst pressure comparable to native arteries. While high tensile strength and burst pressure by increasing collagen production from a rigid material or cell sheet scaffold, these constructs still had low elastin production and compliance, which is a major problem to cause graft failure after implantation. Considering these issues, we hypothesized that an elastometric biomaterial combined with mechanical conditioning would provide elasticity and conduct mechanical signals more efficiently to vascular cells, which increase extracellular matrix production and support cellular orientation. The objective of this report is to introduce a fabrication technique of porous tubular scaffolds and a dynamic mechanical conditioning for applying them to arterial tissue engineering. We used a biodegradable elastomer, poly (glycerol sebacate) (PGS) for fabricating porous tubular scaffolds from the salt fusion method. Adult primary baboon smooth muscle cells (SMCs) were seeded on the lumen of scaffolds, which cultured in our designed pulsatile flow bioreactor for 3 weeks. PGS scaffolds had consistent thickness and randomly distributed macro- and micro-pores. Mechanical conditioning from pulsatile flow bioreactor supported SMC orientation and enhanced ECM production in scaffolds. These results suggest that elastomeric scaffolds and mechanical conditioning of bioreactor culture may be a promising method for arterial tissue engineering.
Decreased aortic diameter and compliance precedes blood pressure increases in postnatal development of elastin-insufficient mice.
Increased arterial stiffness and blood pressure are characteristic of humans and adult mice with reduced elastin levels caused by aging or genetic disease. Direct associations have been shown between increased arterial stiffness and hypertension in humans, but it is not known whether changes in mechanical properties or increased blood pressure occur first. Using genetically modified mice with elastin haploinsufficiency (Eln(+/-)), we investigated the temporal relationship between arterial mechanical properties and blood pressure throughout postnatal development. Our results show that some mechanical properties are maintained constant regardless of elastin amounts. The peak diameter compliance for both genotypes occurs near the physiologic pressure at each age, which acts to provide maximum pulse dampening. The stress-strain relationships are similar between genotypes and become nonlinear near the systolic pressure for each age, which serves to limit distension under high pressure. Our results also show that some mechanical properties are affected by reduced elastin levels and that these changes occur before measurable changes in blood pressure. Eln(+/-) mice have decreased aortic diameter and compliance in ex vivo tests that are significant by postnatal day 7 and increased blood pressure that is not significant until postnatal day 14. This temporal relationship suggests that targeting large arteries to increase diameter or compliance may be an effective treatment for human hypertension.
Skh:HR-1 hairless mice were irradiated chronically with sub-erythemal doses of UVB radiation, and a number of biochemical parameters in the skin were determined after 6, 12, 18, and 24 wk of exposure. The parameters measured were water, collagen, elastin, and glycosaminoglycan content; collagenase and elastase levels; and Bz-Tyr-OEt (N-benzoyl-L-tyrosine ethyl ester) and BAPNA (alpha-N-benzoyl-DL-arginine-p-nitroanilide) hydrolyzing activities. Data for UVB radiation-exposed and chronological age-matched control mice were compared with respect to unit area and to unit mass of skin. On a unit area of skin basis, UVB radiation exposure increased the level of most parameters. The particular exceptions were collagen and collagenase which remained constant. On a mass of skin basis, though, there is an apparent decrease in collagen content because of the increase in the other skin components. This suggests that there is insufficient collagen in UVB radiation-exposed skin to support the increasing mass of the tissue.
Effects of the Nd:YAG 1320-nm laser on skin rejuvenation: clinical and histological correlations.
The neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser is a popular non-ablative treatment used for skin rejuvenation. The purpose of this prospective study was to evaluate the clinical effects, coupled with a quantitative assessment, of the histological changes in response to Nd:YAG 1320-nm laser treatment of periocular wrinkles. Six volunteers with Fitzpatrick skin types III and IV and Glogau class I-II wrinkles were subjected to 3 months of Nd:YAG 1320-nm treatment in the periocular area (six sessions at 2-week intervals). Volunteers were photographed, and skin biopsies were obtained at baseline as well as 3 and 6 months after the start of treatments. Quantitative evaluation of total elastin, newly synthesized tropoelastin, collagen types I, III and VII, and newly synthesized collagen was performed using a computerized morphometric analysis. A noticeable clinical and histological improvement was observed after Nd:YAG 1320-nm treatment. Collagen types I, III and VII, as well as newly synthesized collagen, together with tropoelastin showed a statistically significant increase in response to treatment, while the mean level of total elastin was significantly decreased after treatment. Our data suggest that Nd:YAG 1320 nm is an effective treatment for skin rejuvenation as it stimulates the repair processes, and reverses the clinical, as well as the histopathological, signs of skin aging.
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
Spontaneous lung dysfunction and fibrosis in mice lacking connexin 40 and endothelial cell connexin 43.
Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. mhkoval@emory.edu
Gap junction proteins (connexins) facilitate intercellular communication and serve several roles in regulation of tissue function and remodeling. To examine the physiologic effects of depleting two prominent endothelial connexins, Cx40 and Cx43, transgenic mice were generated by breeding Cx40-deficient mice (Cx40(-/-)) with a vascular endothelial cell (VEC)-specific Cx43-deficient mouse strain (VEC Cx43(-/-)) to produce double-connexin knockout mice (VEC Cx43(-/-)/Cx40(-/-)). The life span in VEC Cx43(-/-)/Cx40(-/-) mice was dramatically shortened, which correlated with severe spontaneous lung abnormalities as the mice aged including increased fibrosis, aberrant alveolar remodeling, and increased lung fibroblast content. Moreover, VEC Cx43(-/-)/Cx40(-/-) mice exhibited cardiac hypertrophy and hypertension. Because VEC Cx43(-/-)/Cx40(-/-) mice demonstrated phenotypic hallmarks that were remarkably similar to those in mice deficient in caveolin-1, pulmonary caveolin expression was examined. Lungs from VEC Cx43(-/-)/Cx40(-/-) mice demonstrated significantly decreased expression of caveolin-1 and caveolin-2. This suggests that expression of caveolin-1 may be linked to expression of Cx40 and endothelial Cx43. Moreover, the phenotype of caveolin-1(-/-) mice and VEC Cx43(-/-)/Cx40(-/-) mice may arise via a common mechanism.
Department of Anatomy with Radiology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
Significant changes in the voice occur after the age of 50 years. Changes in the structure of the vocal fold (VF) can interfere with the voice. The aim of this study is to investigate the structure of the VF of elderly people that may contribute to the tendency of the human voice to deteriorate. Larynges were obtained from eight embalmed cadavers aged 72-98 years. The middle portion of each vocal fold was removed and placed in 4% buffered formalin. Tissue blocks were then processed and embedded in wax. Four to six micron coronal sections were cut and stained with Haematoxylin and Eosin (H&amp;E), Masson's Trichrome (MTS), Elastin van Gieson (EVG), Herovici (HERO), picrosirius and CD31 immunohistochemical marker in order to study the collagen fibers, elastic fibers and microvasculature of the VF. The maturity of collagen fibers within the VF were noted to increase from the superficial to the deep layer of the lamina propria (LP). Contrary to current literature, the amount of elastic fibers was sparse in the superficial layer of the LP in the vocal tissue of elderly cadavers. Numerous cross-sectioned blood vessels were seen in the lamina propria near the free edge, and near the superior and inferior surfaces of the VF. The presence of lymphatic vessels was confirmed in the VF of elderly subjects. This study revealed that the collagenous component of the deep layer of the VF LP was made up of mature fibers whilst immature collagen fibers made up the superficial layer of the LP. There was a notable scarcity of elastic fibers in the superficial layer of the LP. Lymphatics were seen and were orientated differently in the geriatric vocal folds.
Aged, 80 and over
[Vessel aging. The role of oxidative stress and protein glycation].
Klinik für Herz- und Thoraxchirurgie, Interdisziplinäres Zentrum Altern in Halle, Universitätsklinikum Halle (Saale), Ernst-Grube Strasse 40, Halle, Germany. andreas.simm@medizin.uni-halle.de
The slow procession of the primary mechanisms of aging leads, at first, to unnoticed changes in the vascular system. Endothelial dysfunction is one of the earliest markers in aging vessels, caused by oxidative stress via the reduction of the availability of NO, on the one hand, and the nitrosylation of proteins, on the other hand. At the same time, glycation of the proteins of the extracellular matrix leads to stiffening of the vessel wall. Together with the loss of elastic fibers, e.g., elastin, this leads to the age-related changes of the vessels. Knowledge of these primary mechanisms of aging may lead to the development of new drugs.
Photoaged skin is clinically characterized by wrinkling, laxity and a leather-like appearance. These symptoms of actinic aging are causally connected to histological and ultrastructural changes of the connective tissue of the dermis. Changes include both enzymatic degradation and reduced de novo synthesis of collagen which cause premature wrinkling of the skin. Changes in the hyaluronan and proteoglycan matrix lead to reduced water content and thereby increased laxity of the skin. Furthermore, the UV-induced remodeling of the extracellular matrix strongly affects the cellular phenotypes such as the regenerative capacity of dermal fibroblasts. In recent years considerable progress has been made towards the understanding of molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the UV-induced changes of the extracellular matrix. Current findings in this field reveal interesting insights in the dermal aging and provide new targets and strategies for the treatment of photoaging.
Increased fibroblast density in actinic cheilitis: association with tryptase-positive mast cells, actinic elastosis and epithelial p53 and COX-2 expression.
Department of Oral Surgery &amp; Laboratory of Oral Biology and Pathology, College of Dentistry, University of Concepción, Concepción, Chile. grojas@udec.cl
Actinic cheilitis (AC) is characterized by epithelial and connective tissue alterations caused by ultraviolet sunlight overexposure known as photodamage. Fibroblasts have been linked to photodamage and tumor progression during skin carcinogenesis; however, their role in early lip carcinogenesis remains unknown. The aim of this study was to assess the density of fibroblasts in AC and normal lip (NL) samples and determine their association with markers of lip photodamage.
Fibroblasts, mast cells, p53, COX-2, and elastin were detected in NL (n = 20) and AC (n = 28) biopsies using immunohistochemistry/histochemistry. Mast cell and fibroblast density and epithelial p53 and COX-2 expression scores were then obtained. Elastosis was scored 1-4 according to elastin fiber density and tortuosity.
Fibroblasts, mast cells, p53, COX-2, and elastosis were increased in AC as compared to NL (P &lt; 0.001). Multivariate analysis showed an association between fibroblast and mast cell density at the papillary and reticular areas of AC and NL (P &lt; 0.05). Papillary fibroblast density was also associated with epithelial p53 and COX-2 expression (P &lt; 0.05). Increased fibroblast density, both papillary and reticular, was found in the high elastosis group (scores 3-4) as compared to the low elastosis group (scores 1-2) (P &lt; 0.01). Increased reticular mast cell density was detected only in the high elastosis group (P &lt; 0.01).
Fibroblasts are increased in AC, and they are associated with mast cell density, epithelial p53 and COX-2 expression, and actinic elastosis. Therefore, fibroblasts may contribute to lip photodamage and could be considered useful markers of early lip carcinogenesis.
Insights into the role of elastin in vocal fold health and disease.
Department of Surgery, Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin Madison, Madison, WI 53705-2275, USA.
Elastic fibers are large, complex, and surprisingly poorly understood extracellular matrix macromolecules. The elastin fiber, generated from a single human gene--elastin, is a self assembling integral protein that endows critical mechanical proprieties to elastic tissues and organs such as the skin, lungs, and arteries. The biology of elastic fibers is complex because they have multiple components, a tightly regulated developmental deposition, a multistep hierarchical assembly, and unique biomechanical functions. Elastin is present in vocal folds, where it plays a pivotal role in the quality of phonation. This review article provides an overview of the genesis of elastin and its wide-ranging structure and function. Specific distribution within the vocal fold lamina propria across the lifespan in normal and pathological states and its contribution to vocal fold biomechanics will be examined. Elastin and elastin-derived molecules are increasingly investigated for their application in tissue engineering. The properties of various elastin-based materials will be discussed and their current and future applications evaluated. A new level of understanding of the biomechanical properties of vocal fold elastin composites and their molecular basis should lead to new strategies for elastic fiber repair and regeneration in aging and disease.
Chandi SM
Two sisters with inherited generalized cutis laxa and a young man with possible acquired cutis laxa are presented.
Elastin was isolated from human aortic tissues by extraction with formic acid. The aortas came from individuals of both sexes with ages ranging from 18 to 67 years. The elastin was treated to remove pre-existing nuclei for hydroxyapatite and mineralized in vitro by incubation in a solution metastable to hydroxyapatite. The results showed an increased rate of mineralization in vitro as the age of the individual from whom the aorta was obtained increased. The lag period in mineral formation seen with elastin samples obtained from individuals below the age 40, disappeared with older elastin. Amino-acid analysis of the elastin samples confirmed earlier results by indicating an increase in the more polar amino acids in the older elastin samples. Exposure of the extracted elastin samples to several proteolytic enzymes including elastase confirmed the identity of the material as elastin.
Laboratory of Hemodynamics and Cardiovascular Technology, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
In the present report, a constituent-based theoretical model of age-related changes in geometry and mechanical properties of conduit arteries is proposed. The model was based on the premise that given the time course of the load on an artery and the accumulation of advanced glycation end-products in the arterial tissue, the initial geometric dimensions and properties of the arterial tissue can be predicted by a solution of a boundary value problem for the governing equations that follow from finite elasticity, structure-based constitutive modeling within the constrained mixture theory, continuum damage theory, and global growth approach for stress-induced structure-based remodeling. An illustrative example of the age-related changes in geometry, structure, composition, and mechanical properties of a human thoracic aorta is considered. Model predictions were in good qualitative agreement with available experimental data in the literature. Limitations and perspectives for refining the model are discussed.
Thirty human aortas with varying degrees of atheroma graded macroscopically according to the WHO classification were taken at autopsy from subjects of different ages (24-86 years). Study by light microscopy showed aortas with an intact wall (4 subjects, 25-46 years) with a thin intima and regular elastic layers, and aortas with varying degrees of modification of the wall, where the intima was of varying thickness and the elastic fibers showed varying degrees of damage (moderate lesions: 5 subjects, 35-52 yrs; severe lesions: 21 subjects, 26-86 yrs). From each aorta, a 4-cm segment from the tunica media, free of atheromatous lesions, was defatted and subjected to successive treatment with EDTA-Tris, 6 M guanidine-HCl-Tris, 6 M guanidine-HCl-Tris-DTE and collagenase. The residues (EP residues) were subjected to amino acid (AA) analysis and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study. In the young subject, the AA composition was similar to that of elastin and the TEM images were characteristic of this substance. In the aging subject, an increase in polar AA and a parallel decrease in apolar AA and crosslinks was noted. By TEM, the elastin was seen to be associated with abundant fibrillar material. Trypsin treatment of EP residues gave E residues, whose composition and TEM appearance were similar in all samples, corresponding to the standard composition of elastin and its classic appearance by electron microscopy. We suggest that the fibrillar material removed by trypsin is the morphological reflection of the chemical variations observed in the EP residues. These correspond to contamination of the elastin by a polar protein fraction. This contamination is closely correlated with age but not with the degree of atheroma. Thus the age-related chemical changes in elastin appear to be independent of the onset and evolution of atheromatous lesions. The 10-15 nm diameter of the contaminating fibrillar material suggests that may be the microfibrillar fraction of elastic tissue.
Aged, 80 and over
Recent information has expanded our knowledge regarding age-related changes in the normal heart. With advancing age there are significant increases in heart weight, ventricular septal and probably left ventricular free wall thickness, and in valve circumferences. In the myocardium, there are increases in fat, collagen, elastin, and lipofuscin. The geometry of the heart changes as well, due to decreasing base-to-apex dimension, rightward shift and dilatation of the aortic root, and left atrial dilatation. The aortic and mitral valves thicken and become fibrotic along their appositional surfaces, and their annuli are the sites of collagen degeneration, lipid accumulation, and calcification. The coronary arteries become tortuous, dilated, and focally calcified. There are atrophy and loss of specialized conduction tissue in the atria and ventricles. These changes, while usually modest, might diminish the ability of the aged heart to adapt to the stresses imposed by a number of cardiovascular diseases.
Aged, 80 and over
Acute aortic dissection is a life-threatening disease with a high rate of mortality. At the Institute of Legal Medicine of the Hanover Medical School, 30 cases with aortic dissections were found during autopsy and examined histologically between 2006 and 2009. The grade of medial alterations in the form of cystic medial necrosis, elastin fragmentation, fibrosis and medionecrosis were estimated semi-quantitatively. In order to assess the normal aging process, samples of the aortic wall of 25 decedents without dissecting aneurysms were analyzed histologically. This study demonstrates that there are partly quantitative differences, particularly with a statistically significant increase in cystic medial necrosis (p&lt;0.001) and elastin fragmentation (p&lt;0.001), between aortas from dissecting aneurysms and the normal aging aorta, which may help to identify genetically predisposed relatives of patients with a dissection of the aorta.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
Aged, 80 and over
Molecular mechanisms and in vivo mouse models of skin aging associated with dermal matrix alterations.
Laboratory of Veterinary Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
Skin is the most superficial body organ and plays an important role in protecting the body from environmental damage and in forming social relations. With the increase of the aging population in our society, dermatological and cosmetic concerns of skin aging are rapidly increasing. Skin aging is a complex process combined with intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Intrinsic or chronological skin aging results from the passage of time and is influenced by genetic factors. Extrinsic skin aging is mainly determined by UV irradiation, also called photoaging. These two types of aging processes are superimposed on sun-exposed skin, and have a common feature of causing dermal matrix alterations that mostly contribute to the formation of wrinkles, laxity, and fragility of aged skin. The dermal matrix contains extracellular matrix proteins such as collagen, elastin, and proteoglycans that confer the strength and resiliency of skin. Skin aging associated with dermal matrix alterations and atrophy can be caused by cellular senescence of dermal cells like fibroblasts, and decreased synthesis and accelerated degradation of dermal matrix components, especially collagen fibers. Both intrinsic aging and photoaging exert influence during each step of dermal matrix alteration via different mechanisms. Mouse models of skin aging have been extensively developed to elucidate intrinsic aging and photoaging processes, to validate in vitro biochemical data, and to test the effects of pharmacological tools for retarding skin aging because they have the advantages of being genetically similar to humans and are easily available.
The regulation of valvular and vascular sclerosis by osteogenic morphogens.
Vascular calcification increasingly afflicts our aging, dysmetabolic population. Once considered only a passive process of dead and dying cells, vascular calcification has now emerged as a highly regulated form of biomineralization organized by collagenous and elastin extracellular matrices. During skeletal bone formation, paracrine epithelial-mesenchymal and endothelial-mesenchymal interactions control osteochondrocytic differentiation of multipotent mesenchymal progenitor cells. These paracrine osteogenic signals, mediated by potent morphogens of the bone morphogenetic protein and wingless-type MMTV integration site family member (Wnt) superfamilies, are also active in the programming of arterial osteoprogenitor cells during vascular and valve calcification. Inflammatory cytokines, reactive oxygen species, and oxylipids-increased in the clinical settings of atherosclerosis, diabetes, and uremia that promote arteriosclerotic calcification-elicit the ectopic vascular activation of osteogenic morphogens. Specific extracellular and intracellular inhibitors of bone morphogenetic protein-Wnt signaling have been identified as contributing to the regulation of osteogenic mineralization during development and disease. These inhibitory pathways and their regulators afford the development of novel therapeutic strategies to prevent and treat valve and vascular sclerosis.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor limits pulse-wave velocity and aortic calcification in a rat model of cystic renal disease.
The effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition on function and structure of the aorta was studied in the Lewis polycystic kidney (LPK) rat model of cystic renal disease and Lewis controls. Pulse-wave velocity (PWV) was recorded under urethane anesthesia (1.3 g/kg ip) in mixed-sex animals aged 6 and 12 wk and in 12-wk-old animals treated with perindopril (3 mg·kg(-1)·day(-1) po) from age 6-12 wk. Tail-cuff systolic pressures were recorded over the treatment period. After PWV measurements, animals were euthanized and the aorta was removed for histomorphological and calcium analysis. Hypertension in LPK at 6 and 12 wk was associated with a shift of the PWV curve upward and to the right, indicating a decrease in aortic compliance, which was significantly reduced by perindopril. LPK demonstrated greater aortic calcification (6 wk: 123 ± 19 vs. 65 ± 7 and 12 wk: 406 ± 6 vs. 67 ± 6 μmol/g, P &lt; 0.001, LPK vs. Lewis, respectively). This was reduced by treatment with perindopril (172 ± 48 μmol/g, 12 wk LPK P &lt; 0.001). Medial cross-sectional area and elastic modulus/wall stress of the aorta were greater in LPK vs. Lewis control animals at 6 and 12 wk of age and showed an age-related increase that was prevented by treatment with perindopril (P &lt; 0.001). Perindopril also ameliorated the degradation of elastin, increase in collagen content, and medial elastocalcinosis seen in 12-wk LPK. Overall, perindopril improved the structural and functional indices of aortic stiffness in the LPK rats, demonstrating a capacity for angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition to limit vascular remodeling in chronic kidney disease.
Alterations in connective tissue metabolism in stress incontinence and prolapse.
We describe current knowledge about collagen/elastin and extracellular matrix metabolism in the genitourinary tract with special emphasis on stress urinary incontinence. We also explored the influence of genetics and reproductive hormones on extracellular matrix metabolism.
We performed a MEDLINE® search from 1995 to February 2011 using the key words stress urinary incontinence, pelvic organ prolapse, extracellular matrix, collagen, elastin, matrix metalloproteinase, collagenase, tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinase, elastin metabolism, elastase, connective tissue, supportive tissue, mechanical stress, biomechanical properties, selective estrogen receptor modulators, transforming growth factor-β and wound healing.
The literature searched produced data on 4 areas of significance for extracellular matrix metabolism in patients with stress urinary incontinence and prolapse, including collagen, elastin and transforming growth factor-β. Data on collagen metabolism continue to support the hypothesis of increased turnover involving matrix metalloproteinases and serine proteases in pelvic tissues of affected individuals. Elastin metabolism studies suggest increased degradation but also abnormal elastin fiber synthesis. Epidemiological data indicate a genetic predisposition to abnormal extracellular matrix in affected individuals while human tissue and animal models reveal differential expression of candidate genes involved in structural proteins. Transforming growth factor-β pathways have been documented to be involved in stress urinary incontinence in human tissues and animal models. Finally, these extracellular matrix metabolisms are modulated by reproductive hormones and selective estrogen receptor modulators.
Pelvic tissue from women with stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse show a genetic predisposition to abnormal extracellular matrix remodeling, which is modulated by reproductive hormones, trauma, mechanical stress load and aging. This progressive remodeling contributes to stress urinary incontinence/pelvic organ prolapse by altering normal tissue architecture and mechanical properties.
Copyright © 2011 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Re: Alterations in connective tissue metabolism in stress incontinence and prolapse: B. Chen and J. Yeh J Urol 2011; 186: 1768-1772.
Re: Alterations in connective tissue metabolism in stress incontinence and prolapse: B. Chen and J. Yeh J Urol 2011; 186: 1768-1772.
Accumulation of degenerated elastic fibers in the sun-exposed skin designated as actinic elastosis is a histological hallmark of photodamaged skin. Previous studies have indicated that the elastic fibers of actinic elastosis interact with lysozyme and are modified by N(ɛ)-(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML), one of the major advanced glycation end products (AGEs). We studied here how CML modification of elastin is involved in the pathogenesis of actinic elastosis. The CML-modified insoluble elastin became resistant to neutrophil elastase digestion, which was reversed by treatment with aminoguanidine, a potent inhibitor of AGE formation. In a temperature-dependent aggregation assay, CML-modified elastin rapidly formed self-aggregates, the size of which was larger than unmodified elastin. The elastic fiber sheets prepared from CML-modified α-elastin showed 3D wider diameter, tortuous appearance, and decreased elasticity on tensile tests. The CML-modified α-elastin, but not unmodified α-elastin, was found to bind to lysozyme in vitro, supporting the immunohistochemical findings that the antibodies for lysozyme and CML reacted simultaneously with the elastic fibers of actinic elastosis and UV-irradiated skin. The glycated elastin is likely to cause the accumulation of abnormally aggregated elastic fibers and unusual interaction with lysozyme in actinic elastosis.
The important role that elastin plays in the development and proper function of lung has long been recognized. Also, the intimate connection between pulmonary emphysema and the destruction of alveolar elastin has been well established. Understanding the mechanisms regulating pulmonary elastin synthesis is crucial to fully understanding these normal and pathological processes. In this article, we review recent literature on elastin structure, the elastin gene and its multiple RNA transcripts, and the different tropoelastin isoforms that are translated from these mRNAs. The similarity of lung and aortic elastin and the cellular origin of lung elastin are also discussed. We next examine the few studies addressing regulation of elastin expression during lung development, maturation, and aging. The search for modulators of pulmonary elastogenesis, which has yielded mostly negative results, is then reviewed. Finally, we present a cell culture model that has been developed to study the molecular basis of lung injury in pulmonary emphysema.
To investigate the effects of chronic low-dose UV irradiation on the skin, hairless mice were irradiated with a 1/3 minimal erythemal dose (MED) of UV. We examined the relationship between visible changes and skin damage in the dermis and epidermis. Hairless mice were irradiated with UVB (20 mJ/cm2) and UVA (14 J/cm2) three times a week for 10 weeks, followed by a 24-week non-irradiation period. Visible fine wrinkling was present after 4 weeks of irradiation, and the wrinkling progressively worsened throughout the period of irradiation. The wrinkles remained after irradiation was discontinued. In dermal components, no significant histological changes in the collagen fibers and elastic fibers were found, and the amount of hydroxyproline was also not changed. Thus, in the epidermis, there was a significant increase in the number of stratum corneum layers and the terminal-differentiation marker, filaggrin, positive cells. The intensity of staining for the differentiation marker, keratin 1, was reduced. These changes were accompanied by wrinkle formation, and remained after discontinuance of irradiation. These findings suggested that chronic low-dose UV irradiation induces structural and quantitative changes in the epidermis as a result of keratinization impairment, and that this damage in the epidermis is an important causative factor in wrinkle formation.
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
Heparan sulfate (HS), due to its presence on the cell surface and in the extracellular milieu and its ability to modulate cell signaling, has a fundamental role in both physiological and pathological conditions. For decades we have demonstrated the occurrence of interactions between glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and elastic fibers. In particular, we have recently shown that HS is present inside elastic fibers and plays a role in the assembly and stability of elastin coacervates. Elastin represents, within the extracellular matrix, the component most severely affected during aging, and changes in the synthesis and posttranslational modifications of HS have been described, possibly influencing cellular behavior and protein interactions. Thus, the present study has investigated, in two different in vitro experimental models, the role of HS on elastin deposition and assembly. Results demonstrate that: (1) Biological effects of HS are partly dependent on the physicochemical characteristics of the GAGs; (2) HS does not affect attachment, viability, and growth of human dermal fibroblasts; (3) HS does not modify elastin gene expression nor elastin synthesis, but favors α-elastin aggregation and, independently from the age of donors, elastin assembly; (4) HS significantly increases the expression of fibulin 5, and these effects are especially evident in fibroblasts isolated from aging donors. These data provide a better understanding of the biological role of HS and offer new perspectives regarding the possibility of restoring and/or preserving the elastic component with aging.
Aged, 80 and over
Two fluorescent wavelengths, 440(ex)/520(em) nm and 370(ex)/440(em) nm, reflect advanced glycation and oxidation end products in human skin without diabetes.
Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) and oxidation products (OPs) play an important role in diabetes complications, aging, and damage from sun exposure. Measurement of skin autofluorescence (SAF) has been promoted as a noninvasive technique to measure skin AGEs, but the actual products quantified are uncertain. We have compared specific SAF measurements with analytically determined AGEs and oxidative biomarkers in skin collagen and determined if these measurements can be correlated with chronological aging and actinic exposure.
SAF at four excitation (ex)/emission (em) intensities was measured on the upper inner arm ("sun protected") and dorsal forearm ("sun exposed") in 40 subjects without diabetes 20-60 years old. Skin collagen from the same sites was analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for three AGEs-pentosidine, carboxymethyllysine (CML), and carboxyethyllysine (CEL)-and the OP methionine sulfoxide (MetSO).
There was poor correlation of AGE-associated fluorescence spectra with AGEs and OP in collagen, with only pentosidine correlating with fluorescence at 370(ex)/440(em) nm. A little-studied SAF (440(ex)/520(em) nm), possibly reflecting elastin cross-links, correlated with all AGEs and OPs. Levels of CML, pentosidine, and MetSO, but not SAF, were significantly higher in sun-exposed skin. These AGEs and OPs, as well as SAF at 370(ex)/440(em) nm and 440(ex)/520(em) nm, increased with chronological aging.
SAF measurements at 370(ex)/440(em) nm and 335(ex)/385(em) nm, except for pentosidine, which correlated with fluorescence at 370(ex)/440(em), correlate poorly with glycated and oxidatively modified protein in human skin and do not reflect actinic modification. A new fluorescence measurement (440(ex)/520(em) nm) appears to reflect AGEs and OPs in skin.
Intense pulsed light photorejuvenation: a histological and immunohistochemical evaluation.
Biopsy specimens were obtained from the periocular area of six volunteers of Fitzpatrick skin type III-IV and Glogau's class I-III wrinkles. They were subjected to three months of IPL treatment (six sessions at two-week intervals). Using histological and immunostaining analysis coupled with computerized morphometric analysis, quantitative evaluation of collagen types I, III and VII, newly synthesized collagen, total elastin and tropoelastin was performed for skin biopsies at baseline, end of treatment, and three months post-treatment.
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
Combination treatment using bipolar radiofrequency-based intense pulsed light, infrared light and diode laser enhanced clinical effectiveness and histological dermal remodeling in Asian photoaged skin.
Combined optical and bipolar radiofrequency (RF) devices have been effective for rejuvenation, but a single modality in one session cannot solve three-dimensional skin complaints, resulting in time-consuming visits.
To evaluate the safety and efficacy of single-session triple treatment using bipolar RF-based optical (intense pulsed light [IPL], infrared light, and diode laser) combination devices for treatment of photoaged Asian skin.
In a split-face trial, 11 women received four treatments at 3-week intervals consisting of the combination of sequential IPL, infrared light, and diode laser, all with RF, in one session. Outcome assessments included photography, global evaluation by blinded investigators, patient assessment, and objective biophysical measurements of color and elasticity. Punch biopsies were obtained from both sides of the face 1 month after the last treatment session.
All patients showed statistically significant reduction in photoaging global score. Objective biophysical measurements showed significant improvements in melanin index and elasticity (R5, R7), as well as increases in the levels of procollagen type I and III and elastin.
A combination of three different energy sources, with bipolar RF, in one session is effective without further downtime for solving multiple problems including tone, texture, and laxity observed in photoaged Asian skin.
Under the dynamic conditions of pulsatile flow, the forces exerted by the fluid on the vessel wall create considerable displacements and stresses within the thickness of the vessel wall. We review a series of analytical options for exploring the dynamics of the vessel wall, specifically displacements and stresses within the depth of the vessel wall, under a range of conditions including the degree of external tethering and the mechanical consistency of the wall material. It is shown that one of the most important effects of tethering is that of drastically restricting radial displacements of and within the vessel wall. This restriction in turn places limits on the length and speed of the propagating wave. Specifically, the wave speed is significantly reduced as a result of tethering. This has important consequences because the wave speed, or pulse wave velocity as it is referred to in the clinical setting, is used as an index of vascular stiffening in relation to aging or age related hypertension. It is found further that the extent of displacements and shear stresses within the vessel wall depend critically on the relative proportions of viscous and elastic content within the wall. In particular, loss of viscous consistency leads to higher shear stresses within the wall, thus putting higher loading on elastin and may ultimately lead to elastin fatigue. As elastin gradually fails, its load bearing function is presumably taken over by collagen which renders the vessel wall less elastic and more rigid as is observed in the aging process.
The role of elastin peptides in modulating the immune response in aging and age-related diseases.
It is now well accepted that aging is associated with the occurrence of a low-grade inflammation called Inflamm-aging. This leads to the imbalance between the various mediators of the inflammatory response in favour of the pro-inflammatory response represented by pro-inflammatory cytokines and oxidative stress. The question that arises, and is still under investigation, what is the origin of the driving force leading to these changes. One of the current hypotheses is that chronic stimulation of the immune system contributes to the pro-inflammatory shift. The chronic stimulation can be of viral origin such as cytomegalovirus, from tumor antigens or from other sources such as the extracellular matrix, especially from elastin fibres and collagens. Aging and various inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis, abdominal aortic aneurysms, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD), cancer and type 2 diabetes are characterized by the destruction of elastin fibers and the consequent generation of elastin peptides which are biologically active. This review will describe the putative contribution of elastin peptides to inflamm-aging and extend on their role on immunosenescence, as well as on age-associated chronic inflammatory diseases.
Changes in mechanical properties are an essential characteristic of the aging process of human skin. Previous studies attribute these changes predominantly to the altered collagen and elastin organization and density of the extracellular matrix. Here, we show that individual dermal fibroblasts also exhibit a significant increase in stiffness during aging in vivo. With the laser-based optical cell stretcher we examined the viscoelastic biomechanics of dermal fibroblasts isolated from 14 human donors aged 27 to 80. Increasing age was clearly accompanied by a stiffening of the investigated cells. We found that fibroblasts from old donors exhibited an increase in rigidity of ∼60% with respect to cells of the youngest donors. A FACS analysis of the content of the cytoskeletal polymers shows a shift from monomeric G-actin to polymerized, filamentous F-actin, but no significant changes in the vimentin and microtubule content. The rheological analysis of fibroblast-populated collagen gels demonstrates that cell stiffening directly results in altered viscoelastic properties of the collagen matrix. These results identify a new mechanism that may contribute to the age-related impairment of elastic properties in human skin. The altered mechanical behavior might influence cell functions involving the cytoskeleton, such as contractility, motility, and proliferation, which are essential for reorganization of the extracellular matrix.
Schenke-Layland K
Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
Age-related arterial alterations affecting cells, matrix and biomolecules are the main culprit for initiation and progression of cardiovascular disease. The objective of this study is to gain further insights into the complex mechanism of elastic tissue ageing in human aortic blood vessels.
One hundred and nineteen human aortic tissue samples were collected from adult patients (101 males, 18 females; age 40-86 years) undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting. Overall extracellular matrix architecture was examined by multiphoton laser scanning microscopy and histology. Matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9, corresponding tissue inhibitors 1 and 2 as well as desmosine were determined. mRNA levels of tropoelastin were assessed by quantitative RT-PCR.
Aged, 80 and over
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
Effects of elastin degradation and surrounding matrix support on artery stability.
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Biomedical Engineering Program, University of Texas at San Antonio and the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA.
Tortuous arteries are often associated with aging, hypertension, atherosclerosis, and degenerative vascular diseases, but the mechanisms are poorly understood. Our recent theoretical analysis suggested that mechanical instability (buckling) may lead to tortuous blood vessels. The objectives of this study were to determine the critical pressure of artery buckling and the effects of elastin degradation and surrounding matrix support on the mechanical stability of arteries. The mechanical properties and critical buckling pressures, at which arteries become unstable and deform into tortuous shapes, were determined for a group of five normal arteries using pressurized inflation and buckling tests. Another group of nine porcine arteries were treated with elastase (8 U/ml), and the mechanical stiffness and critical pressure were obtained before and after treatment. The effect of surrounding tissue support was simulated using a gelatin gel. The critical pressures of the five normal arteries were 9.52 kPa (SD 1.53) and 17.10 kPa (SD 5.11) at axial stretch ratios of 1.3 and 1.5, respectively, while model predicted critical pressures were 10.11 kPa (SD 3.12) and 17.86 kPa (SD 5.21), respectively. Elastase treatment significantly reduced the critical buckling pressure (P &lt; 0.01). Arteries with surrounding matrix support buckled into multiple waves at a higher critical pressure. We concluded that artery buckling under luminal pressure can be predicted by a buckling equation. Elastin degradation weakens the arterial wall and reduces the critical pressure, which thus leads to tortuous vessels. These results shed light on the mechanisms of the development of tortuous vessels due to elastin deficiency.
Age-related aortic stiffness is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular diseases. Although oxidative stress is implicated in aortic stiffness, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unelucidated. Here, we examined the source of oxidative stress in aging and its effect on smooth muscle cell (SMC) function and aortic compliance using mutant mouse models.
Pulse wave velocity, determined using Doppler, increased with age in superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2)+/- but not in wild-type, p47phox-/- and SOD1+/- mice. Echocardiography showed impaired cardiac function in these mice. Increased collagen I expression, impaired elastic lamellae integrity, and increased medial SMC apoptosis were observed in the aortic wall of aged SOD2+/- versus wild-type (16-month-old) mice. Aortic SMCs from aged SOD2+/- mice showed increased collagen I and decreased elastin expression, increased matrix metalloproteinase-2 expression and activity, and increased sensitivity to staurosporine-induced apoptosis versus aged wild-type and young (4-month-old) SOD2+/- mice. Smooth muscle α-actin levels were increased with age in SOD2+/- versus wild-type SMCs. Aged SOD2+/- SMCs had attenuated insulin-like growth factor-1-induced Akt and Forkhead box O3a phosphorylation and prolonged tumor necrosis factor-α-induced Jun N-terminal kinase 1 activation. Aged SOD2+/- SMCs had increased mitochondrial superoxide but decreased hydrogen peroxide levels. Finally, dominant-negative Forkhead box O3a overexpression attenuated staurosporine-induced apoptosis in aged SOD2+/- SMCs.
Mitochondrial oxidative stress over a lifetime causes aortic stiffening, in part by inducing vascular wall remodeling, intrinsic changes in SMC stiffness, and aortic SMC apoptosis.
Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical University, 2630 Sugitani, 930-0194, Toyama, Japan. toyodam@toyoma-mpu.ac.jp
The cutaneous microvasculature was examined by electron microscopy in order to compare its characteristics in photodamaged preauricular skin and in sun-protected postauricular sites of 15 Japanese women aged 58-81 years. The characteristic ultrastructural features of the microvasculature in photodamaged skin compared with those in sun-protected skin included dilated vessels embedded in elastin which depressed endothelial cells, vessels surrounded by a thick amorphous material composed of multiple laminations of a basement membrane-like material, and activated endothelial cells which had increased numbers of cytoplasmic organelles and pinocytotic vesicles. A novel finding of this study in photodamaged vessels was an increased formation of new vessels (angiogenesis) via two distinct pathways. In severe elastosis, activated endothelial cells with densely packed intracytoplasmic microfilaments extended large pseudopods into the elastotic material. In contrast, isolated mesenchymal cells, which possessed immature Weibel-Palade bodies, were scattered around pre-existing vessels within the Grenz zone. In some cases, many mesenchymal cells with electron-lucent cytoplasms aggregated and interconnected by cytoplasmic processes, which was followed by the formation of vascular structures. These results suggest that there are significant ultrastructural differences in vessels between photoaged and intrinsically aged facial skin and that the photodamaged microvascular system is characterized by the co-existence of regressive changes and angiogenesis.
Aged, 80 and over
Application of a topical biomimetic electrical signaling technology to photo-aging: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of a galvanic zinc-copper complex.
The first signs of facial skin photo-aging often occur in the skin of the periorbital area and include sagging, loss of firmness and definition, and sallowness. Epidermal wounds have been shown to alter the trans-epithelial electrical potential creating an electric signal that directs cell migration in epithelial wound healing; this electric field declines sharply with age. A topical galvanic zinc-copper complex, which couples elemental zinc and copper to create a biomimetic electric field, has demonstrated anti-inflammatory activity and extracellular matrix improvement in vitro, including collagen and elastin production.
To evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of a galvanic zinc-copper complex on photo-aging parameters in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial.
In this eight-week study, women (40-65 years) with mild to moderate photo-aging were randomized to use placebo or 1 of 3 galvanic zinc-copper complex compositions (gel and activating moisturizer). Efficacy evaluations included clinical grading, specialized clinical imaging, and subject self-assessments performed at baseline, 15-30 minutes after product application and after 1, 2, 4, and 8 weeks. Tolerability was based on adverse events and clinical grading of irritation. Significance was set at P?0.05 versus baseline and between treatment groups.
The study was completed by 124 women. Compositions containing the galvanic zinc-copper complex showed statistically significant clinical improvements versus placebo and baseline rapidly (15-30 min) after application and through week 8. Clinical grading showed significant improvement versus placebo in skin radiance and under-eye dark circles 15-30 minutes after first application with continued improvement through week 8, and in overall photo-damage, fine lines, lifted appearance of the eyes, and under-eye wrinkles starting after two weeks and continuing through week 8. Test compositions were well tolerated.
This galvanic zinc-copper complex provided rapid and lasting improvements versus placebo in photo-aged skin, supporting its use in topical anti-aging formulations.
Randomized Controlled Trial
Maturation is associated with changes in rat cerebral artery structure, biomechanical properties and tone.
Mandalà M
Department of Cell Biology, University of Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende, Italy. maurizio.mandala@uvm.edu
This study evaluated the hypothesis that physiological maturation affects cerebral artery smooth muscle-endothelial interactions involved in pressure-induced tone and alters the dimensional and biomechanical properties of small posterior cerebral arteries (PCA).
Secondary branches of PCA from young (4-5 weeks old, n=11), adult (14-16 weeks old, n=11) and mature (44-47 weeks old, n=11) male Sprague-Dawley rats were isolated, cannulated, pressurized and subjected to a range of intraluminal pressures (10-110 mmHg) to determine tone with and without pharmacologic nitric oxide synthase (NOS) inhibition. Measurements of passive lumen diameter and wall thickness as a function of pressure were used to determine changes in structure, distensibility and wall stress; histological analysis was performed on vessel cross-sections to assess collagen and elastin contents.
Although pressure-dependent tone decreased significantly during ageing, differences between groups were abolished by NOS inhibition. Vessel diameters increased in adult vs. young rats (at 90 mmHg, 233 ± 6.0 μm vs. 192 ± 4.5 μm; P&lt;0.05), possibly secondary to somatic growth. Further ageing was associated with reductions in lumen diameter (207 ± 6.5 μm; P&lt;0.05), increased wall and media thickness (and wall/lumen ratio) and cross-sectional area. Distensibility and wall collagen were unchanged, although elastin content was significantly reduced.
Maturation is associated with differences in PCA dimensional properties that indicate a pattern of initial outward eutrophic, followed by inward hypertrophic remodelling. Functionally, the contribution of basal NO increases with age in a way that reduces pressure-dependent tone and diminishes vasodilator reserve.
© 2011 The Authors Acta Physiologica © 2011 Scandinavian Physiological Society.
Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-7288, USA. david.sell@case.edu
Arterial stiffening is a progressive, ubiquitous and irreversible aging process that is interwoven with and accelerated by various diseases such as diabetes, atherosclerosis and hypertension. In large arteries, aging is characterized by decreased turnover of collagen and elastin and increased advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) and cross-links. Elastic fibers undergo lysis and disorganization subsequent to their replacement by collagen and other matrix components. These events cause the loss of elasticity and induce stiffening. Conceptual approaches to minimize AGE accumulation in arteries include caloric restriction, exercise, low dietary intake of AGEs, deglycation enzymes, increased clearance of AGEs, antagonists of AGE receptors and pharmaceutical interventions. Much optimism exists in the ability of 'AGE breakers' such as alagebrium (ALT-711) to cleave AGE cross-links and reverse the age-related stiffening of arteries. However, there is little evidence that these agents actually break pre-existing AGE cross-links in vivo. In contrast, many of these anti-AGE agents share in common the ability to chelate metals, thus acting as inhibitors of metal-catalyzed AGE and protein carbonyl formation. Future work on interventions into the causes of arterial stiffness in aging needs to address more rigorously the relationship between stochastic forms of damage, such a glycation and oxidation, and the changes in elastic fiber structure thought to contribute to loss of arterial elasticity.
Aged, 80 and over
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
Morphological and Biochemical Changes During Aging and Photoaging of the Skin of C57BL/6J Mice.
Department of Veterinary Pathology, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.
The differences between the dorsal skin of 11- and 16-week-old C57BL/6J mice were examined morphologically and biochemically. The dermis of the 16-week-old mice was thinner than that of the 11-week-old mice due to decreases in the amounts of soluble collagen and elastin. Next, the changes in dorsal skin exposed to UVA irradiation for 8 weeks (576 J/cm(2)) were examined in 3 (younger)- and 8 (older)-week-old C57BL/6J mice. The thickness of the dermis was not significantly different between the UVA-irradiated and control mice in either the younger or older group. The increase in the amount of collagen was related to the increase in the level of soluble collagen in the younger mice. In contrast, it was related to the increase in the level of insoluble collagen in the older mice. In the UVA-irradiated older mice, the activity of the latent form of MMP-13 was significantly higher than that in the control mice. These results suggest that aging and UVA-induced photoaging in the skin are histologically and biochemically different phenomena.
Biochemical investigation and gene analysis of equol: a plant and soy-derived isoflavonoid with antiaging and antioxidant properties with potential human skin applications.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of equol, a plant and intestinal flora derived isoflavonoid molecule on the expression of skin genes and proteins using human dermal models. As equol has been shown to mimic 17β-estradiol and bind specifically to 5α-dihydrotestostone (5α-DHT), these agents were used (in addition to equol) to determine whether equol may play important and beneficial roles in the extracellular matrix (ECM). Equol at 0.3 or 1.2% in qPCR experiments using a human skin barrier model examined ECM gene expression. Equol, 5α-DHT, and 17β-estradiol at 10 nM were studied in human monolayer fibroblasts cultures (hMFC) for ECM protein expression. Human fibroblast three-dimensional organotypic cultures revealed equol's influence (@ 10 nM) on ECM proteins via fluorescent-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis. In qPCR experiments, equol significantly increased collagen, elastin (ELN), and tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease and decreased metalloproteinases (MMPs) gene expression and caused significant positive changes in skin antioxidant and antiaging genes. In hMFC, equol significantly increased collagen type I (COL1A1), whereas, 5α-DHT significantly decreased cell viability that was blocked by equol. FACS analysis showed equol and 17β-estradiol significantly stimulated COL1A1, collagen type III (COL3A1), and ELN while MMPs were significantly decreased compared with control values. Finally, tamoxifen blocked the positive influences of equol on ECM proteins via FACS analysis. These findings suggest that equol has the potential to be used topically for the treatment and prevention of skin aging, by enhancing ECM components in human skin.
Copyright © 2012 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.
To help to resolve the controversy regarding the composition of the glenoid labrum, thirty-eight shoulders from cadavera were examined grossly and histologically. We used specimens for individuals of different ages so that we could determine what changes occur as a result of aging. In children and adults, the labrum appeared to be fibrocartilaginous tissue. The labrum was a separate anatomical structure that could be distinguished from the fibrous capsule of the shoulder. Neonatal labra were composed of primitive mesenchymal tissue containing only few chondrocytes that modulated into fibrocartilage in the first few years of life. Neonatal labra contained no elastin, whereas specimens from adults had rare elastin fibers. The labrum was sparsely vascularized throughout its substance, with no particular pattern of distribution. Vascularity decreased with increasing age of the individual.
Aged, 80 and over
Comparison of biaxial mechanical properties of coronary sinus tissues from porcine, ovine and aged human species.
Tissue Mechanics Lab, Biomedical Engineering Program and Mechanical Engineering Department, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA.
Due to its proximity to the mitral valve, the coronary sinus (CS) vessel serves as a conduit for the deployment and implantation of the percutaneous transvenous mitral annuloplasty (PTMA) devices that can potentially reduce the mitral regurgitation. Because CS vessel is a venous tissue and seldom diseased, its mechanical properties have not been well studied. In this study, we performed a multi-axial mechanical test and histological analysis to characterize the mechanical and structural properties of the aged human, porcine and ovine CS tissues. The results showed that the aged human CS tissues exhibited much stiffer and highly anisotropic behaviors compared to the porcine and ovine. Both of the porcine and ovine CS vessel walls were thicker and mainly composed of striated muscle fibers (SMF), whereas the thinner aged human CS had higher collagen, less SMF, and more fragmented elastin fibers, which are possibly due to aging effects. We also observed that the anatomical features of porcine CS vessel might be not suitable for PTMA deployment. These differences between animal and human models raise questions for the validity of using animal models to investigate the biomechanics involved in the PTMA intervention. Therefore, caution must be taken in future studies of PTMA stents using animal models.
Beneficial regulation of fibrillar collagens, heat shock protein-47, elastin fiber components, transforming growth factor-β1, vascular endothelial growth factor and oxidative stress effects by copper in dermal fibroblasts.
Parakandi H
Skin aging is associated with the loss of the structural collagens and the elastin fiber components that form the extracellular matrix (ECM). It is associated with reduced transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), angiogenesis and increased oxidative stress. Copper has been incorporated into cosmetics for anti-skin aging. This research investigated the mechanism for the anti-skin aging effect copper ions, from cuprous oxide powders. Dermal fibroblasts were exposed to copper and examined for expression (protein and/or promoter levels) of types I, III, V collagen, heat shock protein-47 (HSP-47), elastin, fibrillin-1, and fibrillin-2, TGF-β1, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and in addition for membrane damage and lipid peroxidation. The direct antioxidant activity of copper was also determined. The research indicates that copper's anti-skin aging and skin regeneration potential is through its stimulation of ECM proteins, TGF-β1, VEGF, and inhibition of oxidative stress effects at physiological concentrations; and supports its use in cosmetics.
For many years, much of the pioneering research on aortic function was carried out by a small group of investigators frequently working away from the clinical environment in the research laboratory. The evaluation of aortic function using aortic pulse wave velocity, aortic distensibility, or other practical indices had yet to reach clinical threshold. It was necessary for the clinicians to take over and to apply these indices to the clinic. In this Odyssey, the work by the basic scientist was important to define the fundamental mechanisms of aortic function; however, it was the vision of the clinical investigator who recognized the importance of aortic function and introduced it into clinical practice. In the near future, the clinical investigator will introduce aortic function in daily clinical practice as the measurement of left ventricular function is used today. A close collaboration between the clinical and the basic investigator will be necessary in order to define the molecular mechanisms related to aortic wall synthesis and degradation of collagen and elastin. Application of these findings by the clinical investigator may help to delay or prevent aortic dysfunction related to aging or other conditions and diseases.
Aged, 80 and over
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
Dermatology, Laser and Vein Specialists of the Carolinas, Charlotte, North Carolina, USA. ssmith@stacyrsmithmd.com
Changes associated with aging are partly due to loss of collagen and elastin. Treatment with autologous fibroblasts grown in culture (azficel-T) can help correct the appearance of aging by replacing lost dermal constituents.
To demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of autologous fibroblasts in the treatment of nasolabial fold (NLF) wrinkles.
Adults with moderate to very severe NLF wrinkles were randomized to receive three treatments with autologous fibroblasts or placebo at 5-week intervals. Blinded evaluators and subjects assessed efficacy using a validated wrinkle assessment scale.
Three hundred seventy-two subjects were enrolled and underwent treatment. Seventy-eight percent of subjects treated with autologous fibroblast therapy and 48% of subjects treated with placebo achieved at least a 1-point improvement on the subject assessment at 6 months (p &lt; 0.001), and 64% of subjects treated with autologous fibroblast therapy and 36% of those treated with placebo showed at least a 1-point improvement evaluator's assessment (p &lt; 0.001). Adverse events were generally mild, and the treatment was well tolerated.
Autologous fibroblast therapy is safe and effective for the treatment of NLF wrinkles. The availability of autologous cell therapy marks the beginning of a new phase in aesthetic therapy.
Randomized Controlled Trial
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
to document the acute and chronic histological changes produced by applying chemical peeling agents used clinically to the UVB-irradiated skin of hairless mice, which served as a model of sun-damaged skin.
three chemical peeling agents, 30% salicylic acid, dissolved in macrogol (a new formulation), 35% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) dissolved in distilled water and 20% glycolic acid dissolved in glycerin were applied to the backs of UVB-irradiated hairless mice. Untreated, irradiated areas of skin served as controls. Specimens were evaluated histologically at 3, 14, 28, and 70 days.
chemical peeling with 30% salicylic acid dissolved in macrogol led to reorganization of the epidermis and a rebuilding of the superficial dermal connective tissue important in reducing wrinkles, and without evidence of inflammatory infiltrates in an animal model of sun-damaged skin. Findings suggest a possible clinical benefit.
Extracellular skin structures in human skin are impaired during intrinsic and extrinsic aging. Assessment of these dermal changes is conducted by subjective clinical evaluation and histological and molecular analysis. We aimed to develop a new parameter for the noninvasive quantitative determination of dermal skin alterations utilizing the high-resolution three-dimensional multiphoton laser scanning microscopy (MPLSM) technique. To quantify structural differences between chronically sun-exposed and sun-protected human skin, the respective collagen-specific second harmonic generation and the elastin-specific autofluorescence signals were recorded in young and elderly volunteers using the MPLSM technique. After image processing, the elastin-to-collagen ratio (ELCOR) was calculated. Results show that the ELCOR parameter of volar forearm skin significantly increases with age. For elderly volunteers, the ELCOR value calculated for the chronically sun-exposed temple area is significantly augmented compared to the sun-protected upper arm area. Based on the MPLSM technology, we introduce the ELCOR parameter as a new means to quantify accurately age-associated alterations in the extracellular matrix.
We tested the activity of the marine nutraceutical CL-1222 added with a coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10)-lutein-selenium component (Celergen(®), Laboratoires-Dom, Switzerland) to protect human fibroblasts against ultraviolet A (UVA)-induced photoaging. Cells obtained from 22- to 39-year-old healthy donors were pretreated with CL-1222 before UV irradiation, as compared with same quantity of the CoQ10-lutein-selenium component. As compared to untreated control, UVA-irradiated samples exhibited a significant increase of secreted matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) (p&lt;0.001) with over four-fold MMP-1 upregulation (p&lt;0.001). Samples treated with CL-1222, but not with the CoQ10-lutein-selenium component, showed a significant decrease of MMP-1 secretion (p&lt;0.01) and expression decrease (&gt;60%, p&lt;0.01) with &gt;54% elastase activity inhibition (p&lt;0.01). This preliminary study shows that such marine nutraceuticals can significantly protect against UV-irradiation irrespective of the CoQ10-lutein-selenium component with a specific protective gene expression modulation amenable to novel clinical applications.
Interactions between extracellular fibronectin and vascular cells are thought to influence the phenotype of those cells. To determine if changes in fibronectin expression accompany the phenotypic changes of vascular tissue characteristic of experimental hypertension, steady state mRNA levels for fibronectin were determined in aortae of normotensive and hypertensive rats. A 3-6-fold increase in fibronectin mRNA was observed in aortic tissue of hypertensive rats following 3 weeks of treatment with deoxycorticosterone and salt, whereas if rats were treated only with deoxycorticosterone or salt alone, no changes occurred. The changes were reversed by normalization of blood pressure. The increases observed were localized to aorta and not to the periaortic tissue. Angiotensin II infusion using osmotic minipumps also caused an increase in fibronectin expression. Age-dependent increases in aortic fibronectin mRNA occurred in several rat strains, and the combined effects of hypertension and aging were greater than either variable alone. A clear distinction between the expression of fibronectin mRNA and that for collagen or tropoelastin were found in hypertensive and aging models. Aortic fibronectin was also increased in the hypertensive rats as determined by Western blot analysis. The findings indicate that elevation in blood pressure increases fibronectin expression in rat aorta and suggest that such changes may influence the aortic cellular responses to hypertension.
We tested the hypothesis that sodium nitrite treatment reverses large elastic artery stiffening in old mice via reductions in collagen I, increases in elastin and/or decreases in advanced glycation end products (AGEs) mediated by reduced oxidative stress. Aortic pulse wave velocity (aPWV), a measure of large elastic artery stiffness, was greater in old (26-28months) compared with young (4-6months) control animals (520±9 vs. 405±6cm/s, p&lt;0.05), and this was reversed by 3weeks of sodium nitrite treatment (50mg/L) (435±17cm/s). Age-related increases (p&lt;0.05) in aortic superoxide production were associated with greater total and adventitial nitrotyrosine staining, all of which were reversed by nitrite treatment. Total and adventitial transforming growth factor β and collagen I were increased, and total and medial elastin were reduced with aging (p&lt;0.05), but were unaffected by sodium nitrite. Aorta from old mice had increased total, adventitial and medial AGEs (p&lt;0.05 vs. young), which were normalized by sodium nitrite treatment. In aortic segments from young mice in vitro, pyrogallol (10μM), a superoxide generator, induced an "aging-like" increase in AGEs, and direct treatment with AGEs induced vascular stiffening; these effects were prevented by incubation with sodium nitrite. De-stiffening of aged large elastic arteries by short-term sodium nitrite therapy is mediated in part by normalization of AGEs secondary to amelioration of oxidative stress.
Histologic and immunohistochemical studies of rectus sheath in obese patients.
Department of General and Endocrine Surgery, Ludwik Rydygier College of Medicine, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Bydgoszcz, Poland. wojszcz@interia.pl
Obesity is a well-established risk factor for incisional hernia development. The exact causative factors have not been clearly defined, and development may result from structural disruptions in the connective tissue of the fasciae. The goal of this study was to compare the content of elastin in the rectus muscle sheath of obese patients and nonobese controls.
The study group consisted of 20 patients with body mass index over 35 kg/m(2) and the control group included 19 patients with normal-range body mass index. The biopsy specimens harvested during surgery were subjected to histologic evaluation, an immunohistochemical reaction with monoclonal anti-elastin antibodies, and the DAB chromatic reaction. The photomicrographs were evaluated using ImageJ software and the percentage of the area affected by the color reaction was assessed. A statistical evaluation was performed.
The specimens harvested from persons in the control group showed in hematoxylin-eosin staining a high density of fibrous elements, arranged in regular bundles. In specimens obtained from the morbidly obese, the density of the fibers was lower and their architecture was disrupted; the bundles were thinner and less regularly arranged. Most photographs show adipose tissue infiltrating the structure of the fascia. Statistical analysis of the percentage of the area occupied by elastin showed a statistically significant difference in favor of the controls.
The quantitative and qualitative changes in the elastin content of rectus abdominis muscle sheath fascia in the obese population may indicate a possible local mechanism influencing the development of incisional hernias.
As the demand for minimally invasive rejuvenation is increasing, micropeel resurfacing using Erbium:Yttrium Aluminum Garnet (Er:YAG) laser 2940 nm has been reported for the treatment of photoaged skin without ablation of the epidermis. However, little is known about the efficacy and underlying histologic changes associated with this type of treatment.
The aims of this study are to evaluate the clinical effect and objectively quantify the histological changes in response to multiple sessions of Er:YAG laser 2940 nm mini-peels.
Six female volunteers of Fitzpatrick skin type III-IV and Glogau's class I-III wrinkles were subjected to six microresurfacing peels at 2-week intervals using Er:YAG 2940 nm laser at subablative fluences of 2-3 J/cm(2) to treat periorbital rhytides. Quantitative evaluation of collagen types I, III, and VII, newly synthesized collagen, total elastin, and tropoelastin was performed by histochemistry and immunohistochemistry coupled with computerized morphometric analysis at base line, end of treatment, and 3 months post-treatment.
Compared to the base line, evaluation of volunteers revealed obvious clinical improvement in response to Er:YAG mini-peels. Collagen types I, III, and VII, as well as newly synthesized collagen, together with tropoelastin showed a statistically significant increase in response to treatment, while the mean level of total elastin was significantly decreased in response to treatment. However, this was followed by regression of improvement at 3 months post-treatment but was still better than baseline.
This study revealed that multiple Er:YAG mini-peels is a promising treatment option for photoaging as it reverses the signs of photoaged skin with little downtime and side effects. However, to maintain the short-term improvement achieved after treatment, continued Er:YAG 2940 nm laser mini-peels is required.
Chronic matrix metalloproteinase inhibition retards age-associated arterial proinflammation and increase in blood pressure.
Age-associated arterial remodeling involves arterial wall collagen deposition and elastin fragmentation, as well as an increase in arterial pressure. This arterial remodeling is linked to proinflammatory signaling, including transforming growth factor-β1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, and proendothelin 1, activated by extracellular matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and orchestrated, in part, by the transcriptional factor ets-1. We tested the hypothesis that inhibition of MMP activation can decelerate the age-associated arterial proinflammation and its attendant increase in arterial pressure. Indeed, chronic administration of a broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor, PD166739, via a daily gavage, to 16-month-old rats for 8 months markedly blunted the expected age-associated increases in arterial pressure. This was accompanied by the following: (1) inhibition of the age-associated increases in aortic gelatinase and interstitial collagenase activity in situ; (2) preservation of the elastic fiber network integrity; (3) a reduction of collagen deposition; (4) a reduction of monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 and transforming growth factor-β1 activation; (5) a diminution in the activity of the profibrogenic signaling molecule SMAD-2/3 phosphorylation; (6) inhibition of proendothelin 1 activation; and (7) downregulation of expression of ets-1. Acute exposure of cultured vascular smooth muscle cells in vitro to proendothelin 1 increased both the transcription and translation of ets-1, and these effects were markedly reduced by MMP inhibition. Furthermore, infection of vascular smooth muscle cells with an adenovirus harboring a full-length ets-1 cDNA increased activities of both transforming growth factor-β1 and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1. Collectively, our results indicate that MMP inhibition retards age-associated arterial proinflammatory signaling, and this is accompanied by preservation of intact elastin fibers, a reduction in collagen, and blunting of an age-associated increase in blood pressure.
Arteriosclerosis is the consequence of numerous factors which may be studied by inspecting; the composition of blood (cholesterol) and haemostasis, as well as, modifications in the composition and structure of aging arterial-wall tissue. Arterial-tunica cells synthesise in particular, elastin and proteoglycan (mucopolysaccharide-protein complexes) which account for the artery's mechanical and elastic properties. We have shown by biochemical separation and characterization that proteoglycan synthesis is considerably modified in aging arterial tissue. The metabolism of these macromolecules declines. Large aggregates of proteoglycan form. Alterations are observed in the distribution of the different protein-associated long chain polysaccharides, in fatty acids and in calcium bound to these proteoglycans favorising the formation of arteriosclerotic plaques. Studies on the aging of arterial cells in culture also demonstrate these same alterations in proteoglycans.
Department of General-, Visceral, Vascular- and Pediatric Surgery, University Hospital Wuerzburg, Oberdürrbacherstr. 6, 97080 Würzburg, Germany. B.von.Rahden@gmail.com
This paper aims to review the current evidence regarding pathogenesis of colonic diverticular disease and its complications, which are a major health problem in the Western world.
Based on selective Medline searches, relevant literature was indentified regarding pathogenesis of (1) diverticulosis/formation of diverticula, (2) diverticulitis/inflammation of diverticula, (3) complicated diverticulitis/perforation, and (4) diverticular bleeding.
Pathogenesis of colonic diverticula is regarded as a multifactorial process, involving dietary factors (Western low-fiber diet), structural changes of the colonic wall (altered musculature, collagen, elastin, etc.) and functional changes (motility disorder, increased intraluminal pressure). Genetic changes are also discussed and aging is also a key factor. Pathogenesis of inflammation (diverticulosis) is regarded as a result of "microperforations" at the fundus of the diverticulum, and not an "abscessed diverticulum" due to an impacted fecolith. Histamine and its receptors do also seem to play a role, corresponding with the promising prophylactic approach with probiotics. Pathogenesis of complicated diverticulitis is characterized by perforation, which is the cardinal feature. Furthermore, an intensive inflammatory infiltrate with macrophages is found in surgical specimens, even after antibiotic pretreatment. Steroid intake and immunosuppression are risk factors and only recently a glucocorticoid-induced tumor necrosis factor-receptor has been suggested to resemble the molecular link. Diverticular bleeding is a distinct disease process-which does usually take place without diverticulitis-and is due to eccentric rupture of the vas rectum.
The pathophysiology of diverticular disease is multifactorial. Some of the current evidence has important implications for clinical practice, e.g., the suggested role of steroid intake and immunosuppression for complicated diverticulitis.
Aging and degeneration of human intervertebral disc (IVD) are associated with biochemical changes, including racemization and glycation. These changes can only be counteracted by protein turnover. Little is known about the longevity of IVD elastin in health or disease. Yet, such knowledge is important for a quantitative understanding of tissue synthesis and degradation.
We have measured the accumulation of d-Asp and pentosidine in IVD elastin. Samples representing a broad range of ages (28-82years) and degeneration grades (1-5) were analyzed.
d/l-Asp for elastin increased linearly with age from 3.2% (early 30s) to 14.8% (early 80s) for normal tissue (grades 1-2) and from 1.7% (late 20s) to 6.0% (until the mid 50s) for degenerate tissue (grades 3-5) with accumulation rates of 16.2±3.1×10(-4) and 11.7±3.8×10(-4)year(-1), respectively; no significant difference was found between these values (p&lt;0.05). Above the mid 50s, a decrease in d-Asp accumulation was recorded in the degenerate tissue. d-Asp accumulation correlated well with pentosidine content for elastin from healthy and degenerate tissues combined. We conclude that IVD elastin is metabolically-stable and long-lived in both healthy and degenerate human IVDs, with signs of new synthesis in the latter. The correlation of d-Asp with pentosidine content suggests that both these agents may be used as markers in the overall aging process of IVD.
Accumulation of modified IVD elastin argues for its longevity and may have a negative impact on its role in disc function. Weak signs of newly synthesized molecules may act to counteract this effect in degenerate tissue.
Aged, 80 and over
Increased deposition of fibulin-2 in solar elastosis and its colocalization with elastic fibres.
Fibulin-2 is a 195-kDa protein belonging to a novel family of extracellular matrix proteins that might be involved in microfibril and elastic fibre organization.
To determine the localization of fibulin-2 in relation to elastic fibres in normal skin and in solar elastosis characterized by increased elastotic material in the papillary dermis.
The expression and synthesis of fibulin-2 was investigated by means of in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis in normal and photoaged skin.
Immunohistochemistry and elastic tissue staining revealed that fibulin-2 deposition mainly colocalized with microfibrils and elastin fibres, with a marked staining of elastotic material in solar elastosis. Western blot analysis demonstrated that in photoaged skin fibulin-2 showed the same electrophoretic mobility as in sun-protected skin. However, in actinic elastosis the amount of fibulin-2 was significantly higher. In addition, smaller degradation products were detectable, presumably reflecting increased proteinase activity in photodamaged skin.
This study shows that deposition of fibulin-2 and elastin is highly co-ordinated, indicating that this protein plays an important role in elastic fibre and microfibril formation in normal and actinically damaged skin.
Fibulin-2 and its association with fibrillin-rich microfibrils in the papillary dermis of photoaged skin.
Fibulin-2 and its association with fibrillin-rich microfibrils in the papillary dermis of photoaged skin.
[Elastin and microfibrils in vascular development and                                     ageing: complementary or opposite roles?].
Ghandour Z
Large arteries allow the vascular system to be more than a simple route in which the blood circulates within the organism. The elastic fibers present in the wall endow these vessels with elasticity and are responsible for the smoothing of the blood pressure and flow, which are delivered discontinuously by the heart. This function is very important to ensure appropriate hemodynamics. Elastic fibers are composed of elastin (90%) and fibrillin-rich microfibrils (10%) which provide the vessels with elasticity and are also signals able to bind to relatively specific cell membrane receptors. Stimulation of the high affinity elastin receptor by elastin peptides or tropoelastin--the elastin precursor--triggers an increase in intracellular free calcium in vascular cells, especially endothelial cells, associated with attachment, migration or proliferation. Similar effects of the stimulation of endothelial cells by microfibrils or fibrillin-1 fragments, which bind to integrins, have been demonstrated. This dual function--mechanical and in signaling--makes the elastic fibers an important actor of the development and ageing processes taking place in blood vessels. An alteration of the elastin (Eln) or fibrillin (Fbn) gene products leads to severe genetic pathologies of the cardiovascular system, such as supravalvular aortic stenosis, or Williams Beuren syndrome--in which elastin deficiency induces aortic stenoses--or Marfan syndrome, in which on the contrary fibrillin-1 deficiency promotes the appearance of aortic aneurysms. Genetically-engineered mouse models of these pathologies (such as Eln+/- mice and Fbn-1+/mgΔ mice, Eln+/-Fbn-1+/- mice) have permitted a better understanding of the pathogenesis of these syndromes. In particular, it has been shown that elastin and fibrillin-1 roles can be complementary in some aspects, while they can be opposed in some other situations. For instance, the double heterozygosity in elastin and fibrillin-1 leads to increased arterial wall stress--compared to the level induced by one of these two deficiencies alone--while the decrease in diameter induced by Eln deficiency is partly compensated by an additional deficiency in Fbn-1. Also, it is now clear that early modifications of elastin or fibrillin-1 availability can alter the normal signaling action of these proteins and lead to long term modifications of the vascular physiology and ageing processes.
Cathepsin G, a serine protease that is activated by ultraviolet (UV) radiation, increases matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) expression in fibroblasts through fibronectin (Fn) fragmentation and promotes the conversion of proMMP-1 to active MMP-1.
This study investigated whether [2-[3-[[(1-benzoyl-4-piperidinyl)methylamino]carbonyl]-2-naphthalenyl]-1-(1-naphthalenyl)-2-oxoethyl]-phosphonic acid (KPA), a cathepsin G inhibitor, plays any role in extracellular matrix (ECM) damage in an in vitro 3D dermal equivalent (DE) and an in vivo ultraviolet B (UVB)-irradiated hairless mice.
We examined the potential ECM-protective effects of a cathepsin G inhibitor in an in vitro 3D DE model and an in vivo UVB-irradiated hairless mouse skin model.
Among five known serine protease inhibitors, KPA showed the strongest potency and selectivity against cathepsin G. KPA inhibited the cathepsin G-mediated MMP-1 increase and alleviated the downregulation of mRNAs encoding collagen and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 in an in vitro 3D DE model. Most importantly, topical application of KPA (0.025%) to the dorsal skin of hairless mice enhanced collagen expression and attenuated UVB-induced Fn fragmentation and upregulation of MMP-2 and MMP-9 activities.
Cathepsin G inhibitors may be useful for the prevention of UVB-induced photoaging through amelioration of ECM damage and MMP upregulation.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
Uterine vascular degeneration is present throughout the uterine wall of multiparous mares. Colinearity between elastosis, endometrial grade, age and parity.
Population Health and Reproduction, University of California, Davis, California 95616, USA. aleste@ucdavis.edu
Vascular degeneration is present in endometrial vessels of multiparous aged mares. The lesions associated with vascular degeneration consist of enlargement, duplication and splitting of the membrana elastica interna and perivascular deposits of elastin. However, there are no similar data available for deep myometrial vessels and the vascular layer. The objectives of the present study were to characterize the status of vasculature in full-thickness uterine necropsy samples and to correlate these findings to endometrial grade, age, and parity. Elastosis was present in myometrial vessels, as well as in large arteries and veins located between the circular and longitudinal myometrial layers. Vascular degeneration was associated with number of foals (P &lt; 0.001) and endometrial grade (P &lt; 0.05), but not with mare age (P &gt; 0.05). Endometrial grade was associated with age (P &lt; 0.001) and vascular grade (P &lt; 0.05), but not with number of foals (P &gt; 0.05). The presence of elastosis in the myometrial vessels was related to problems associated with chronic uterine infection (CUI) and delayed uterine clearance (DUC) of infertile mares. Uterine contractility was impaired in mares affected by CUI and/or DUC and could be related to a lack of myometrial blood flow. Additionally, degeneration of large vessels in the vascular layer may indicate a general compromise in uterine blood flow and fertility. The main conclusions were the presence of vascular elastosis in large deep myometrial vessels as well as in endometrial vessels, and that the factor with the strongest association with vascular degeneration was number of foals (P &lt; 0.001), followed by endometrial grade (P &lt; 0.05), but no association with mare age.
Efficacy of mesotherapy in facial rejuvenation: a histological and immunohistochemical evaluation.
Mesotherapy, commonly known as "biorejuvenation" or "biorevitalization", is a technique used to rejuvenate the skin by means of a transdermal injection of a multivitamin solution and natural plant extracts that are thought to improve the signs of skin aging.
This prospective study aimed to evaluate the clinical effect of mesotherapy applied to periorbital wrinkles and to quantitatively evaluate histological changes in the skin occurring in response to the same treatment.
Six volunteers with Fitzpatrick skin types III or IV and Glogau class I-III wrinkles were subjected to a three-month course of mesotherapy injections in the periocular area (six sessions administered at two-week intervals). Standard photographs and skin biopsies were obtained from the treatment area at baseline, at the end of treatment, and at three months post-treatment. Quantitative evaluation of collagen types I, III, and VII, newly synthesized collagen, total elastin, and tropoelastin was performed using a computerized morphometric analysis.
The clinical evaluation of volunteers at baseline, end of treatment, and three months post-treatment revealed no significant differences. Histological and immunostaining analysis of collagen types I, III, and VII, newly synthesized collagen, total elastin, and tropoelastin showed no statistically significant changes (P &gt; 0.05) after mesotherapy injection.
Transmembrane delivery of active peptides and proteins, including skin delivery of cosmeceutical proteins such as collagen and elastin, has been a challenging issue. Amphipathic cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) have been proposed as carrier peptides to mediate cellular uptake of proteins without covalent binding.
In this study, we have used a short peptide, Pep-1, as our CPP to transport elastin into fibroblast cells. Different ratios of Pep-1/elastin complexes were produced by using a fixed amount of elastin and different molar ratio of Pep-1. The ability of transduction into cells was determined by fluorescence microscopy. The characteristics of Pep-1/elastin complexes were monitored using scanning electron microscopy and photon correlation spectroscopy.
Pep-1 mediated fast and effective delivery of elastin as a cosmetic protein into fibroblast cells in the treatment of skin-aging symptoms.
Laryngeal aging and acoustic changes in male rat ultrasonic vocalizations.
This study examined changes in the acoustic and temporal structure of ultrasonic vocalizations as a function of age and correlated acoustic changes with vocal fold microstructure. Ultrasonic vocalizations were recorded in three age groups of male rats: aged (24-26 months), middle-aged (17-18 months), and young (4-5 months). Acoustic and structural changes in vocal fold tissue were evident by 18 months of age. Histological analyses revealed decreased density of elastin and hyaluronic acid and increased collagen density in the middle-aged and aged groups compared to the young rats. Laryngeal microstructure correlated with some of the ultrasonic acoustic features. These results show that male Long Evans rats experience changes in ultrasonic acoustic structure by middle age, and these changes correlate with deterioration in laryngeal microstructure. Ultrasonic vocalizations can be used as a model system for age-related degeneration in vocal fold structure and function.
Current therapies for male lower urinary tract symptoms secondary to prostate enlargement prevent hormonal effects on prostate growth and inhibit smooth muscle contraction to ease bladder neck and urethral pressure. However, lower urinary tract symptoms can be refractory to these therapies, suggesting that additional biological processes not addressed by them may also contribute to lower urinary tract symptoms. Aging associated fibrotic changes in tissue architecture contribute to dysfunction in multiple organ systems. Thus, we tested whether such changes potentially have a role in impaired urethral function and perhaps in male lower urinary tract symptoms.
Periurethral tissues were obtained from a whole prostate ex vivo and from 28 consecutive men treated with radical prostatectomy. Lower urinary tract symptoms were assessed using the American Urological Association symptom index. Prostate tissues were subjected to mechanical testing to assess rigidity and stiffness. Fixed sections of these tissues were evaluated for collagen and elastin content, and glandularity to assess fibrosis. Statistical analysis included the Student t test and calculation of Pearson correlation coefficients to compare groups.
Periurethral prostate tissues demonstrated nonlinear viscoelastic mechanical behavior. Tissue from men with lower urinary tract symptoms was significantly stiffer (p = 0.0016) with significantly higher collagen content (p = 0.0038) and lower glandularity than that from men without lower urinary tract symptoms (American Urological Association symptom index 8 or greater vs 7 or less).
Findings show that extracellular matrix deposition and fibrosis characterize the periurethral prostate tissue of some men with lower urinary tract symptoms. They point to fibrosis as a factor contributing to lower urinary tract symptom etiology.
Copyright © 2012 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Sharpey's "perforating" fibers (SF) are well known skeletally in tooth anchorage. Elsewhere they provide anchorage for the periosteum and are less well documented. Immunohistochemistry has transformed their potential significance by identifying their collagen type III (CIII) content and enabling their mapping in domains as permeating arrays of fibers (5-25 μ thick), protected from osteoclastic resorption by their poor mineralization. As periosteal extensions they are crucial in early skeletal development and central to intramembranous bone healing, providing unique microanatomical avenues for musculoskeletal exchange, their composition (e.g., collagen type VI, elastin, tenascin) combined with a multiaxial pattern of insertion suggesting a role more complex than attachment alone would justify. A proportion permeate the cortex to the endosteum (and beyond), fusing into a CIII-rich osteoid layer (&lt;2 μ thick) encompassing all resting surfaces, and with which they apparently integrate into a PERIOSTEAL-SHARPEY FIBER-ENDOSTEUM (PSE) structural continuum. This intraosseous system behaves in favor of bone loss or gain depending upon extraneous stimuli (i.e., like Frost's hypothetical "mechanostat"). Thus, the birefringent fibers are sensitive to humoral factors (e.g., estrogen causes retraction, rat femur model), physical activity (e.g., running causes expansion, rat model), aging (e.g., causes fragmentation, pig mandible model), and pathology (e.g., atrophied in osteoporosis, hypertrophied in osteoarthritis, human proximal femur), and with encroaching mineral particles hardening the usually soft parts. In this way the unobtrusive periosteal SF network may regulate bone status, perhaps even contributing to predictable "hotspots" of trabecular disconnection, particularly at sites of tension prone to fatigue, and with the network deteriorating significantly before bone matrix loss.
Dermatology Research Centre, Institute of Inflammation and Repair, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, 1.523 Stopford Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. abigail.langton@manchester.ac.uk
With increasing age, dynamic tissues such as lungs, blood vessels and skin lose their ability to both deform and recoil, culminating in tissue stiffening. This loss of tissue elasticity, which profoundly impacts tissue function and thus morbidity, may be due not only to changes in the relative abundance of key extracellular matrix proteins within tissues but also to their accumulation of post-translational modifications. Whilst to date attention has focussed primarily on the age-related non-enzymatic formation of advanced glycation end products, the accumulation of pathological enzyme-mediated cross-links may also lead to age-related tissue stiffening. The lysyl oxidase (LOX) family of enzymes are constitutively expressed in adult tissues and are known to drive the catalysis of cross-links in both fibrillar collagens and elastin. Although immunochemical approaches are commonly used to localise the inactive pro-enzyme of LOX, and biochemical methods are employed to quantify activity in homogenised tissue, they do not allow for the in situ localisation of the enzyme. Thus, we have developed a novel assay to both detect and localise LOX enzyme activity in situ. LOX family members are amine oxidases and this assay uses the principle that an amine substrate in the presence of this class of enzyme will be oxidised to an aldehyde and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). In turn, H2O2, when combined with luminol and horseradish peroxidase, will produce a light-emitting reaction that can be detected by film autoradiography. The development of a technique to localise specific amine oxidase activity in tissue sections may provide crucial additional information on the exact role played by this class of enzymes in mediating age-related tissue stiffening.
Multi-scale biomechanical remodeling in aging and genetic mutant murine mitral valve leaflets: insights into Marfan syndrome.
Mitral valve degeneration is a key component of the pathophysiology of Marfan syndrome. The biomechanical consequences of aging and genetic mutation in mitral valves are poorly understood because of limited tools to study this in mouse models. Our aim was to determine the global biomechanical and local cell-matrix deformation relationships in the aging and Marfan related Fbn1 mutated murine mitral valve. To conduct this investigation, a novel stretching apparatus and gripping method was implemented to directly quantify both global tissue biomechanics and local cellular deformation and matrix fiber realignment in murine mitral valves. Excised mitral valve leaflets from wild-type and Fbn1 mutant mice from 2 weeks to 10 months in age were tested in circumferential orientation under continuous laser optical imaging. Mouse mitral valves stiffen with age, correlating with increases in collagen fraction and matrix fiber alignment. Fbn1 mutation resulted in significantly more compliant valves (modulus 1.34 ± 0.12 vs. 2.51 ± 0.31 MPa, respectively, P&lt;.01) at 4 months, corresponding with an increase in proportion of GAGs and decrease in elastin fraction. Local cellular deformation and fiber alignment change linearly with global tissue stretch, and these slopes become more extreme with aging. In comparison, Fbn1 mutated valves have decoupled cellular deformation and fiber alignment with tissue stretch. Taken together, quantitative understanding of multi-scale murine planar tissue biomechanics is essential for establishing consequences of aging and genetic mutations. Decoupling of local cell-matrix deformation kinematics with global tissue stretch may be an important mechanism of normal and pathological biomechanical remodeling in valves.
Immunohistochemical detection of lipid peroxidation products, protein-bound acrolein and 4-hydroxynonenal protein adducts, in actinic elastosis of photodamaged skin.
Acrolein and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE) are both byproducts of a lipid peroxidation reaction. Actinic elastosis in photodamaged skin of aged individuals is characterized by the accumulation of fragmented elastic fibers in the sun-exposed areas. To study whether a lipid peroxidation reaction is involved in the accumulation of altered elastic fibers in actinic elastosis, skin specimens obtained from sun-damaged areas were immunohistochemically examined using the antibodies against acrolein and HNE. Both antibodies were found to react with the accumulations of elastic material. Double immunofluorescence labeling demonstrated that acrolein/elastin and HNE/elastin were colocalized in the actinic elastosis. Western blot analysis showed that the polypeptide with a molecular weight of 62 kDa reacted with anti-acrolein, anti-HNE and anti-elastin antibodies. The results suggest that acrolein and HNE may be associated with actinic elastosis.
Aged, 80 and over
This study aimed to investigate the susceptibility of intact fibrillar human elastin to human leukocyte elastase and cathepsin G. Elastin is a vital protein of the extracellular matrix of vertebrates, and provides exceptional properties including elasticity and tensile strength to many tissues and organs, including the aorta, lung, cartilage, elastic ligaments and skin, and is thus critical for their long-term function. Mature elastin is an insoluble and extremely durable protein that undergoes very little turnover, but sustained exposure to proteases may lead to irreversible and severe damage, and thus to functional loss of the elastic fiber network. Hence, it is a key issue to understand which enzymes actually initiate elastolysis under certain pathological conditions or during intrinsic aging. In this paper, we provide a complete workflow for isolation of pure and intact elastin from very small tissue samples to test enzymes for their elastolytic potential. This workflow was applied to skin samples from variously aged individuals, and it was found that strong differences exist in the degradability of the elastins investigated. In summary, human leukocyte elastase was unable to degrade intact elastin fibers but hydrolyzed elastin derived from the skin of old people. However, cathepsin G cleaved all elastin samples, even those derived from younger individuals. These results indicate that human leukocyte elastase is not a driving force for elastolysis, but may nevertheless promote further breakdown of elastic fibers after the action of other enzymes such as cathepsin G.
Aged, 80 and over
Calpain-1 regulation of matrix metalloproteinase 2 activity in vascular smooth muscle cells facilitates age-associated aortic wall calcification and fibrosis.
Age-associated central arterial wall stiffness is linked to extracellular matrix remodeling, including fibrosis and vascular calcification. Angiotensin II induces both matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) and calpain-1 expression and activity in the arterial wall. However, the role of calpain-1 in MMP2 activation and extracellular matrix remodeling remains unknown. Dual histo-immunolabeling demonstrates colocalization of calpain-1 and MMP2 within old rat vascular smooth muscle cells. Overexpression of calpain-1 induces MMP2 transcripts, protein levels, and activity, in part, by increasing the ratio of membrane type 1 MMPs to tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 2. These effects of calpain-1 overexpression-induced MMP2 activation are linked to increased collagen I and III production and vascular calcification. In addition, overexpression of calpain-1 also induces transforming growth factor-β1/Smad signaling, elastin degradation, alkaline phosphatase activation, and total calcium content but reduces the expression of calcification inhibitors, osteopontin, and osteonectin, in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells in vitro and in carotid artery rings ex vivo. Furthermore, both calpain-1 and collagen II increase with aging within human aortic intima. Interestingly, in aged human aortic wall, both calpain-1 and collagen II are highly expressed in artherosclerotic plaque areas compared with grossly normal areas. Cross-talk of 2 proteases, calpain-1 and MMP2, leads to secretion of active MMP2, which modulates extracellular matrix remodeling via enhancing collagen production and facilitating vascular calcification. These results establish calpain-1 as a novel molecular candidate to retard age-associated extracellular matrix remodeling and its attendant risk for hypertension and atherosclerosis.
Effective properties of a sturgeon-based bioactive compound on stress-induced hippocampal degeneration and on in vitro neurogenesis.
The aim of this study is to test the activity of a marine bioactive compound containing high-purity caviar-derived DNA, collagen elastin and protein extracts from sturgeon (LD-1227, Caviarlieri, Laboratoires Dom, Switzerland) to exert neuroprotective properties in an experimental setting while also being potential triggers of neurogenesis in a separate in vitro study. Supplementation with high-DHA mixture of LD-1227 was applied for 30 days to stress model rats. Both supplementations significantly mitigated the histological brain damage when analyzing hippocampal subregions and corticosterone level. However, LD-1227 was most significantly efficient in preventing SOD, Catalase and ascorbic acid decrease in brain tissue. Both supplementations stimulated neurogenesis in vitro and neuron markers in particular but og olygodendrocyte markers and glia increased only in LD-1227-enriched medium. Taken together, these data suggest that LD-1227 is able to significantly protect the brain structure redox system to higher degree than DHA. Moreover, from in vitro study it appears that marine bioactive compound, through it wide array of small unsaturated fatty acids, phospholipids and neurotransmitter precursors, is likely to influence neuronal and glial lineage to act differently from a DHA-rich mixture.
Topical retinoids, such as tretinoin, have been established as the gold standard for the treatment of photodamaged skin. This was a single-center, open-label, single-group, observational histologic subanalysis of 3 of 19 patients participating in a study of the efficacy and safety of tretinoin emollient cream 0.02% for the treatment of moderate to severe facial photodamage.
Subjects were female, 18 years of age or older, and instructed to apply tretinoin 0.02% to the treatment areas for 12 months. Histology was undertaken using facial photographs and 2-mm biopsies of the lateral canthus area that were obtained from 3 subjects at baseline and 12 months.
Histopathologic analyses revealed evidence of extensive solar elastosis at baseline for 2 of the 3 subjects who were white, with moderate elastosis observed for the third subject who was African American. Histologic improvements in photodamage following 12 months of treatment with tretinoin 0.02% were observed for each subject. Improvements included smoothing of the epidermis, a slightly thinner keratin layer, and thin, comparatively straight elastic and collagen fibers in the mid- to deep-dermal layer.
The histologic changes in all subjects could be attributed to a remodeling (elastin) or repair (collagen) process that affected the connective tissue fibers in all layers of the dermis. These results suggest that tretinoin 0.02% may be an effective treatment for photodamage, and additional evaluation is warranted in future studies.
Curcumin ameliorates arterial dysfunction and oxidative stress with aging.
We tested the hypothesis that curcumin supplementation would reverse arterial dysfunction and vascular oxidative stress with aging. Young (Y, 4-6 months) and old (O, 26-28 months) male C57BL6/N mice were given normal or curcumin supplemented (0.2%) chow for 4 weeks (n=5-10/group/measure). Large elastic artery stiffness, assessed by aortic pulse wave velocity (aPWV), was greater in O (448±15 vs. 349±15 cm/s) and associated with greater collagen I and advanced glycation end-products and less elastin (all P&lt;0.05). In O, curcumin restored aPWV (386±15 cm/s), collagen I and AGEs (AGEs) to levels not different vs. Y. Ex vivo carotid artery acetylcholine (ACh)-induced endothelial-dependent dilation (EDD, 79±3 vs. 94±2%), nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability and protein expression of endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) were lower in O (all P&lt;0.05). In O, curcumin restored NO-mediated EDD (92±2%) to levels of Y. Acute ex vivo administration of the superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimetic TEMPOL normalized EDD in O control mice (93±3%), but had no effect in Y control or O curcumin treated animals. O had greater arterial nitrotyrosine abundance, superoxide production and NADPH oxidase p67 subunit expression, and lower manganese SOD (all P&lt;0.05), all of which were reversed with curcumin. Curcumin had no effects on Y. Curcumin supplementation ameliorates age-associated large elastic artery stiffening, NO-mediated vascular endothelial dysfunction, oxidative stress and increases in collagen and AGEs in mice. Curcumin may be a novel therapy for treating arterial aging in humans.
Receptor for advanced glycation end products contributes to postnatal pulmonary development and adult lung maintenance program in mice.
The role of the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) in promoting the inflammatory response through activation of NF-κB pathway is well established. Recent findings indicate that RAGE may also have a regulative function in apoptosis, as well as in cellular proliferation, differentiation, and adhesion. Unlike other organs, lung tissue in adulthood and during organ development shows relatively high levels of RAGE expression. Thus a role for the receptor in lung organogenesis and homeostasis may be proposed. To evaluate the role of RAGE in lung development and adult lung homeostasis, we generated hemizygous and homozygous transgenic mice overexpressing human RAGE, and analyzed their lungs from the fourth postnatal day to adulthood. Moderate RAGE hyperexpression during lung development influenced secondary septation, resulting in an impairment of alveolar morphogenesis and leading to significant changes in morphometric parameters such as airspace number and the size of alveolar ducts. An increase in alveolar cell apoptosis and a decrease in cell proliferation were demonstrated by the terminal deoxy-nucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling reaction, active caspase-3, and Ki-67 immunohistochemistry. Alterations in elastin organization and deposition and in TGF-β expression were observed. In homozygous mice, the hyperexpression of RAGE resulted in histological changes resembling those changes characterizing human bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). RAGE hyperexpression in the adult lung is associated with an increase of the alveolar destructive index and persistent inflammatory status leading to "destructive" emphysema. These results suggest an important role for RAGE in both alveolar development and lung homeostasis, and open new doors to working hypotheses on the pathogenesis of BPD and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
In vitro tenocyte metabolism in aging and oestrogen deficiency.
Preclinical and Surgical Studies Laboratory, Codivilla Putti Research Institute, Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute, via di Barbiano, 1/10, 40136, Bologna, Italy, paola.torricelli@ior.it.
Little is known about tendons and tenocyte biological behaviour during aging and, especially, oestrogen deficiency. The aim of this study was to evaluate in vitro the proliferation and metabolism of tenocytes isolated from the Achilles tendons of ovariectomised (OVX), middle-aged (OLD) and young (YOUNG) rats. An in vitro model of micro-wound healing was also used to assess age and oestrogen deficiency differences in tendon healing. In standard culture condition, OLD and OVX tenocytes showed a significantly lower proliferation rate, collagen I, aggrecan and elastin than YOUNG ones. In OVX group, fibronectin and elastin significantly decreased in comparison to YOUNG and OLD groups, respectively, whereas vascular endothelial growth factor and metalloproteinases-13 increased than those of both YOUNG and OLD groups. In the micro-wound healing model, tenocytes from both OVX and OLD showed a significantly lower healing rate, proliferation rate, collagen I and nitrix oxide in comparison to YOUNG. OVX elastin value was significantly lower than YOUNG one and OVX healing rate and cell migration speed, proliferation rate and fibronectin results were lower, whereas collagen III and metalloproteinase-13 higher in comparison to both YOUNG and OLD groups. These results highlighted how aging and, more significantly, oestrogen deficiency negatively affect tendon metabolism and healing. Our work improves the body of knowledge on the effects of senescence and oestrogen deficiency on tenocyte behaviour and allows further studies to find solution for the prevention of tendon injuries in aging and menopause.
Biomechanical properties and histological structure of sinus of Valsalva aneurysms in relation to age and region.
Laboratory of Experimental Surgery and Surgical Research, School of Medicine, University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
Information on the biomechanical properties of aortic root aneurysms that would facilitate our understanding of their rupture modes is currently unavailable. In this study, whole-thickness wall specimens from aortic root aneurysms were studied in vitro so as to compare the biomechanical properties with gross histomorphology and composition, in relation to age, region, and direction. The stress-strain relationship was determined under uniaxial loading conditions and characterized by the Fung-type material model in terms of optimized material constants; failure properties were recorded. The connective tissue contents of the basic scleroproteins were also determined through computerized histology. Aging had a deleterious influence on the tensile strength of the aneurysmal sinus tissue, causing also stiffening and reduced extensibility that was consistent with the deficient elastin and collagen contents. Direction-dependent differences were demonstrated in the noncoronary sinus, with the circumferential being stiffer and stronger than the longitudinal direction, justified by the preferred collagen reinforcement along that direction there. In the left and right coronary sinus, the material constants and failure properties were essentially the same in the two directions, justified by the arbitrary orientation of medial (collagen and elastin fibers, and cellular) components relative to the circumferential-longitudinal directions. The material characterization results afforded, and the regional and age-related differences in the strength of the sinus wall, i.e. in its capacity to withstand hemodynamic stresses, are hoped to provide novel insight into the pathophysiological mechanisms responsible for the highest incidence of ruptured aortic root aneurysms in the right coronary and noncoronary sinus.
Effects of collagen and collagen hydrolysate from jellyfish umbrella on histological and immunity changes of mice photoaging.
College of Chemistry and Engineering, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming, 650500, Yunnan, China. 27664975@qq.com
Jellyfish collagen (JC) was extracted from jellyfish umbrella and hydrolyzed to prepare jellyfish collagen hydrolysate (JCH). The effects of JC and JCH on UV-induced skin damage of mice were evaluated by the skin moisture, microscopic analyses of skin and immunity indexes. The skin moisture analyses showed that moisture retention ability of UV-induced mice skin was increased by JC and JCH. Further histological analysis showed that JC and JCH could repair the endogenous collagen and elastin protein fibers, and could maintain the natural ratio of type I to type III collagen. The immunity indexes showed that JC and JCH play a role in enhancing immunity of photoaging mice in vivo. JCH showed much higher protective ability than JC. These results suggest that JCH as a potential novel antiphotoaging agent from natural resources.
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
The skin possesses unique biochemical properties that allow it to protect and conform to the body that it covers. Elements constituting the dermis-collagen and elastin-primarily afford these properties.
To define these properties and explore their relevance with regard to aging skin and dermatologic surgery.
In the first part of this review, the determinants of mechanical properties of the skin will be outlined, through an extensive review of the literature. General physical properties that explain the behavior of skin will be defined, and diseases that manifest the extremes of those properties will be discussed. In the second half of this discussion, the surgical implications of skin biomechanics will be reviewed.
Emphasis will be placed on understanding how dermatologic surgeons may optimally use skin properties to produce the best cosmetic and functional outcomes possible.
Understanding of the biomechanical properties of skin is paramount to obtain the best cosmetic outcomes in dermatologic surgery.
[Structural peculiarities of the human cerebral communicating arteries and their repercussion in encephalic vascular pathology].
The reason of this paper is study the organization of communicating arteries as cause of this fragility. Material and methods. The material of this study is composed of 61 human cerebral communicating arteries, grouped in decades. The study has been carried out by histological routine.
In general the structure of cerebral communicating arteries is characterized for the thinness and irregularity of the wall. In the childhood the internal elastic membrane and tunica media show thicker, while in young and adult people appear elastic fibers and reticulin as well as smooth muscle cells in tunica media. In adulthood (50 60 years) collagen in adventicia occupies tunica media, and adventicia is weaked. There are frequent media defects in these communicating arteries, that are usually repaired for conjunctive tissue stopper with abundance of collagen fibers. Starting from 4th decade the internal elastic membrane shows a great number of fenestrae through muscle and fiber tissue of media occupying subintimal space. Doubtless media defects mean the most severe threat of vascular outbreak.
The structural evolution with the age of communicating arteries, with predominance of collagen over elastin and reticulin, could be their reason of fragility.
Age-related changes in structure and extracellular matrix protein expression levels in rat tendons.
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine-Northwest, 3400 Broadway St., Gary, IN, 46408-1197, USA, tkostrom@iun.edu.
The musculoskeletal system (muscle-tendon-bone) demonstrates numerous age-related changes, with modifications in tendons the least well studied, although increased predisposition to tendinopathy and rupture have been reported. In order to gain insights into the basis of age-associated increase in tendon injuries, we compared Achilles and tibialis anterior tendons and myotendinous junctions (MTJs) from 3- to 5- and 22- to 25-month-old rats for underlying structure and composition. Significant decreases were observed by qRT-PCR for collagen I, III, and V mRNA expression in tendons of old rats, but immunostaining detected no apparent differences in collagen I and V expression on the protein level. Tendons of old compared with young rats had decreased mRNA expression levels of proteoglycan 4 (PRG4) and elastin (Eln), but no differences in the mRNA expression of connective tissue growth factor, TGF-beta 1, or stromal cell-derived factor 1. For PRG4, immunostaining showed good correlation with qRT-PCR results. This is the first study to show reductions in PRG4 in tendons and MTJs of old rats. Decreased PRG4 expression in tendons could result in increased tendon stiffness and may be associated with decreased activity in the elderly. The diminished collagen mRNA expression in combination with decreased PRG4 and Eln mRNA expression may be associated with increased risk of tendon injury with aging.
Ovarian cancer has an extremely high mortality rate resulting from poor understanding of the disease. In order to aid understanding of disease etiology and progression, we identify the endogenous fluorophores present in a mouse model of ovarian cancer and describe changes in fluorophore abundance and distribution with age and disease.
A mouse model of ovarian cancer was created by dosing with 4-vinylcyclohexene diepoxide, which induces follicular apoptosis (simulating menopause), and 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene, a known carcinogen. Imaging of ovarian tissue was completed ex vivo with a multiphoton microscope using excitation wavelength of 780 nm and emission collection from 405 to 505 nm. Two-photon excited fluorescence images and corresponding histologic sections with selective stains were used to identify endogenous fluorophores.
The majority of collected fluorescence emission was attributed to NADH and lipofuscin, with additional contributions from collagen and elastin. Dim cellular fluorescence from NADH did not show observable changes with age. Changes in ovarian morphology with disease development frequently caused increased fluorescence contributions from collagen and adipose tissue-associated NADH. Lipofuscin fluorescence was much brighter than NADH fluorescence and increased as a function of both age and disease.
Our finding of NADH fluorescence patterns similar to that seen previously in human ovary, combined with the observation of lipofuscin accumulation with age and disease also seen in human organs, suggests that the findings from this model may be relevant to human ovarian disease. Increased lipofuscin fluorescence might be used as an indicator of disease in the ovary and this finding warrants further study.
Inactivation of serum response factor contributes to decrease vascular muscular tone and arterial stiffness in mice.
Challande P
We investigated whether SRF and its target genes regulate intrinsic SM tone and thereby arterial stiffness.
The SRF gene was inactivated SM-specific knockout of SRF (SRF(SMKO)) specifically in vascular SM cells by injection of tamoxifen into adult transgenic mice. Fifteen days later, arterial pressure and carotid thickness were lower in SRF(SMKO) than in control mice. The carotid distensibility/pressure and elastic modulus/wall stress curves showed a greater arterial elasticity in SRF(SMKO) without modification in collagen/elastin ratio. In SRF(SMKO), vasodilation was decreased in aorta and carotid arteries, whereas a decrease in contractile response was found in mesenteric arteries. By contrast, in mice with inducible SRF overexpression, the in vitro contractile response was significantly increased in all arteries. Without endothelium, the contraction was reduced in SRF(SMKO) compared with control aortic rings owing to impairment of the NO pathway. Contractile components (SM-actin and myosin light chain), regulators of the contractile response (myosin light chain kinase, myosin phosphatase target subunit 1, and protein kinase C-potentiated myosin phosphatase inhibitor) and integrins were reduced in SRF(SMKO).
SRF controls vasoconstriction in mesenteric arteries via vascular SM cell phenotypic modulation linked to changes in contractile protein gene expression. SRF-related decreases in vasomotor tone and cell-matrix attachment increase arterial elasticity in large arteries.
Effects of aging on mechanics and composition of cerebral arterioles in rats.
The purpose of this study was to examine effects of aging on the mechanics and composition of cerebral arterioles. We measured pressure (servo-null) and diameter in pial arterioles in anesthetized adult (9-12 months old) and aged (24-27 months old) Fischer 344 rats. After deactivation of smooth muscle with EDTA, diameter of pial arterioles at 70 mm Hg pial arteriolar pressure was less in aged than in adult rats (67 +/- 4 vs. 81 +/- 4 microns [mean +/- SEM], p less than 0.05). The stress-strain relation and the slope of tangential elastic modulus versus stress (6.8 +/- 0.6 vs. 5.3 +/- 0.3, p less than 0.05) indicated that distensibility of pial arterioles was reduced in aged rats. Cross-sectional area of the vessel wall, measured histologically, was less in aged than adult rats (1,239 +/- 91 vs. 1,832 +/- 180 microns2, p less than 0.05). Point counting stereology was used to quantitate smooth muscle, elastin, collagen, and basement membrane in the arteriolar wall. Cross-sectional areas of smooth muscle and elastin were significantly less in aged than adult rats (744 +/- 57 vs. 1,291 +/- 119 microns2 for smooth muscle, 52 +/- 6 vs. 113 +/- 15 microns2 for elastin; p less than 0.05), whereas cross-sectional areas of collagen and basement membrane were not significantly different in aged and adult rats (4 +/- 1 vs. 3 +/- 1 microns2 for collagen, 236 +/- 17 vs. 258 +/- 31 microns2 for basement membrane). The ratio of nondistensible (collagen and basement membrane) to distensible (smooth muscle and elastin) components was greater in aged than adult rats (0.30 +/- 0.01 vs. 0.18 +/- 0.01, p less than 0.05). Thus, we conclude that, during aging, cerebral arterioles undergo atrophy, distensibility of cerebral arterioles is reduced, and the relative proportion of distensible elements, elastin and smooth muscle, is reduced in the arteriolar wall.
Following a stroke, the administration of stem cells that have been treated with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) can ameliorate functional deficits in both rats and humans. It is not known, however, whether the application of GCSF-mobilized peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) to human skin can function as an antiaging treatment. We used a Lanyu pig (Sus scrofa) model, since compared with rodents, the structure of a pig's skin is very similar to human skin, to provide preliminary data on whether these cells can exert antiaging effects over a short time frame. GCSF-mobilized PBSCs from a young male Lanyu pig (5 months) were injected intradermally into the cheek skin of aged female Lanyu pigs, and tissues before and after the cell injections were compared to determine whether this treatment caused skin rejuvenation. Increased levels of collagen, elastin, hyaluronic acid, and the hyaluronic acid receptor CD44 were observed in both dermal and subcutaneous layers following the injection of PBSCs. In addition, the treated skin tissue was tighter and more elastic than adjacent control regions of aged skin tissue. In the epidermal layer, PBSC injection altered the levels of both involucrin and integrin, indicating an increased rate of epidermal cell renewal as evidenced by reductions in both cornified cells and cells of the spinous layers and increases in the number of dividing cells within the basal layer. We found that the exogenous PBSCs, visualized using fluorescence in situ hybridization, were located primarily in hair follicles and adjacent tissues. In summary, PBSC injection restored young skin properties in the skin of aged (90 months) pigs. On the basis of our preliminary data, we conclude that intradermal injection of GCSF-mobilized PBSCs from a young pig can rejuvenate the skin in aged pigs.
The aging neck: a diagnostic approach to surgical and nonsurgical options.
University of Medicine &amp; Dentistry of New Jersey, Surgery, Division of Plastic Surgery, and New Jersey Plastic Surgery, 29 Park Street, Montclair, USA. DrD@NJPSMD.com
The neck is a prominent indicator of aging. Loss of subcutaneous fat, prominence of platysmal banding, jowling along the mandibular border, and excessive skin laxity due to loss of collagen and elastin are common conditions that are treated. Laser technology provides additional benefits when treating the first two anatomical layers of the neck.
A 7-category classification system of anatomic skin layers of the lower face was developed. Based on the classifications treatments include the use of laser, ultrasonic technology, and toxins.
A classification system offering surgical and nonsurgical treatments including a 1440-nm laser fiber with a specifically designed tip to allow targeted energy delivery managed through a thermal sensing device.
Treatment options correlate with the presence and severity of conditions. Categories 1 and 2 have only a fat excess condition. Laser application alone, without skin intervention, is utilized. The amount of fat with subsequent aspiration follows guidelines of categories 2 through 5. The 1440-nm laser helps in all treatments. The surgeon may elect to address skin tightening with surgical tightening in categories 6 and 7. Modalities such as toxins and focused ultrasound can be used to address muscle laxity.
Piercing and Tattoos - MedlinePlus Health Information
Elastin and collagen fibre microstructure of the human aorta in ageing and disease: a review.
Aortic disease is a significant cause of death in developed countries. The most common forms of aortic disease are aneurysm, dissection, atherosclerotic occlusion and ageing-induced stiffening. The microstructure of the aortic tissue has been studied with great interest, because alteration of the quantity and/or architecture of the connective fibres (elastin and collagen) within the aortic wall, which directly imparts elasticity and strength, can lead to the mechanical and functional changes associated with these conditions. This review article summarizes the state of the art with respect to characterization of connective fibre microstructure in the wall of the human aorta in ageing and disease, with emphasis on the ascending thoracic aorta and abdominal aorta where the most common forms of aortic disease tend to occur.
The effects of age, vessel size, and Ehlers-Danlos type IV syndrome on the waviness index of arteries.
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome is a rare hereditary connective tissue disorder produced by collagen abnormalities. The Type IV variant causes vascular rupture in the second and third decades. Definitive diagnosis at present is based on demonstrating a deficiency of Type III collagen or procollagen chemically or in fibroblast cultures. Both require fresh tissue. We have shown in fixed autopsy tissue that the elastin in two EDS IV patients appears accordion-pleated with a high waviness index (WI) of 1.58 +/- 0.028 (n = 90) compared to 1.35 +/- 0.08 (n = 446) for 21 controls aged 9 to 71. The WI is the ratio of the length of elastin in the internal elastic lamina to the circumference. The group were significantly different statistically (p less than 0.01) with a randomized block design analysis. Vessel size and age did not alter the WI in either controls or patients. There was significant overlap of data points between the two groups so that no conclusions can be drawn on individual vessels. However, if the waviness index is greater than 1.8, the vessels are unlikely to be normal. We did not study patients with other connective tissue diseases. The WI may be a useful qualitative guide of abnormality in a retrospective study if the diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos Type IV is entertained.
Quantitative assessment of aortic elasticity with aging using velocity-vector imaging and its histologic correlation.
Velocity-vector imaging (VVI) represents a valuable new method for noninvasive quantification of vascular properties associated with aging. The purpose of this study was to assess the correlations between VVI parameters and histological changes with aging.
Fourteen mongrel dogs were classified as either young (n=7; age, 1-2 years; female; weighing 22-29 kg) or senescent (n=7; age, 8-12 years; female; weighing 36-45 kg). The short-axis image of the descending thoracic aorta was obtained for VVI analysis with transesophageal echocardiography. The location of the image was identified using fluoroscopic guidance, and the aortic tissue was extracted. After dividing the aortic wall into 6 segments, both regional and segmental tissue collagen and elastin contents were quantified and correlated with the aortic elastic properties. In the regional analysis, the M-mode-derived aortic dimensions and elastic moduli except for intima-media thickness were not significantly different between the groups, whereas the VVI-derived aortic area and fractional area changes showed more dilated and stiffer aorta in senescent dogs. Also, fractional area change was significantly correlated with the tissue collagen content unlike the M-mode-derived elastic moduli. In the segmental analysis, the radial velocity, circumferential strain, and strain rates of VVI were more reduced in senescent dogs than young dogs, and the radial velocity and circumferential strain showed independent associations with the collagen content of the corresponding aortic wall.
Differential levels of elastin fibers and TGF-β signaling in the skin of Caucasians and African Americans.
While skin color is the most notable difference among ethnic skins the current knowledge on skin physiological and aging properties are based mainly on Caucasian skin studies.
To evaluate histological differences in elastin fiber network and differential responsiveness to TGF-β in skin of Caucasians and African Americans.
These studies were undertaken using human skin biopsies, primary dermal fibroblasts, Western blot analyses, immunofluorescence microscopy, cDNA array and quantitative real-time PCR.
In Caucasian subjects, tropoelastin expression and elastin fibers in photoprotected skin was substantially less than in age-matched African American skin. Expression of tropoelastin in photoexposed skin of African American was similar to their photoprotected skin, suggesting that photoexposure did not affect elastin fibers in African American skin to the same extent as Caucasian skin. An elevated level of TGF-β1 present in media from dermal fibroblasts derived from African American skins correlated well with the higher levels of TGF-β mRNA in African American skins analyzed by cDNA array. Treatment with TGF-β1 resulted in a considerably higher induction of elastin mRNA in dermal fibroblasts from African Americans than from Caucasian fibroblasts, indicative of enhanced TGF-β signaling in African American skins. Furthermore, UVA exposure decreased levels of elastin mRNA in Caucasian fibroblasts compared to African Americans fibroblasts.
These results suggest that there are ethnic differences in the elastin fiber network and in TGF-β signaling in African American and Caucasian skin, and that African American have less UV dependent loss of elastin than Caucasian which may contribute to the different perceived aging phenotypes.
Copyright © 2013 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
Age- and gender-related changes in ligament components.
The age- and gender-related changes in extracellular matrix components (elastin, elastin cross-links, fibrillin, collagen and glycoprotein) and mineral components (calcium, Ca; phosphorus, P) in human lumbar yellow ligaments were investigated using samples obtained from surgical specimens. The mineral (Ca and P) contents increased with ageing (r = 0.703 and r = 0.772, respectively), whereas the contents of matrix components tended to decrease with ageing (elastin r = -0.261, elastin cross-links r = -0.213, fibrillin r = 0.494; collagen r = -0.322 and glycoprotein r = -0.143). Comparison of the male and female groups revealed that the ligament elastin content and elastin cross-links decreased in the male group, whereas the ligament collagen content decreased in the female group significantly in an age-dependent manner (r = -0.788, r = -0.753 and r = -0.721, respectively). These findings demonstrate age- and gender-related changes in mineral and matrix components (especially elastin and collagen) in the lumbar yellow ligaments in the Japanese population. It is suggested that elastin and collagen metabolism in ligaments changes both with age and according to gender.
Protein glycation refers to the spontaneous reaction of reducing sugars with proteins and the subsequent formation of stable advanced glycation end products (AGEs). Glycation is linked with oxidative stress, and this association is called "glycoxidation". Glycoxidation alters the protein structure and function and causes tissue aging, as seen in human skin. Therefore, research on substances inhibiting glycoxidation appears to be crucial in the prevention of skin aging. With this aim, several plant extracts have been screened for antiglycation activity, and the results of the best candidates are presented in this article.
Glycation was studied on human skin proteins (collagen, elastin, and albumin) and on a model of reconstructed skin. Oxidative stress has been addressed by testing the copper-induced low-density lipoprotein oxidation, ultraviolet irradiation of glycated dermis, and carbonyl activation of human dermal fibroblasts. A clinical test evaluated the extent of oxidative stress induced by ultraviolet A irradiation.
Among the tested products, several plant extracts have decreased the glycation effects on skin proteins collagen, elastin, and albumin. In addition, a plant extract has significantly inhibited the different forms of oxidative stress associated with protein glycation.
Elastin is an intriguing extracellular matrix protein present in all connective tissues of vertebrates, rendering essential elasticity to connective tissues subjected to repeated physiological stresses. Using piezoresponse force microscopy, we show that the polarity of aortic elastin is switchable by an electrical field, which may be associated with the recently discovered biological ferroelectricity in the aorta. More interestingly, it is discovered that the switching in aortic elastin is largely suppressed by glucose treatment, which appears to freeze the internal asymmetric polar structures of elastin, making it much harder to switch, or suppressing the switching completely. Such loss of ferroelectricity could have important physiological and pathological implications from aging to arteriosclerosis that are closely related to glycation of elastin.
Large elastic artery stiffness with aging: novel translational mechanisms and interventions.
Department of Kinesiology and Health Promotion, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506, USA.
Large elastic artery stiffness is an independent predictor of age-related cardiovascular events that is attributable to structural remodeling throughout the artery. The intima, media and adventitial layers of the artery uniquely remodel with advancing age and all contribute to arterial stiffening. The specific expression of the extracellular matrix proteins collagen and elastin, and post-translational modifications of these proteins by advanced glycation end-products are key mechanisms in arterial stiffening with age and will be reviewed in the context of region-specific expression. In addition, interventions for attenuating age-related arterial stiffness and novel imaging advances for translating basic findings to older clinical populations will be discussed.
A retinyl palmitate-loaded solid lipid nanoparticle system: effect of surface modification with dicetyl phosphate on skin permeation in vitro and anti-wrinkle effect in vivo.
Surface-modified solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) containing retinyl palmitate (Rpal) were prepared by the hot-melt method using Gelucire 50/13(®) and Precirol ATO5(®). Dicetyl phosphate (DCP) was added to negatively charge the surfaces of the SLNs and thereby enhance the skin distribution properties of Rpal. In vitro skin permeation and in vivo anti-aging studies were performed using SLNs dispersed in a hydrogel. The SLNs were under 100 nm in size with an even polydispersity index (PDI), and the high absolute zeta-potential value was sufficient to maintain the colloidal stability of the SLNs. DCP-modified negative SLNs (DCPmod-SLNs) enhanced the skin distribution of Rpal 4.8-fold and delivered Rpal to a greater depth than did neutral SLNs. The in vivo anti-wrinkle effect of the DCPmod-SLN formulation was Rpal dose-dependent. However, the anti-wrinkle effects of the DCPmod-SLN formulations were significantly different from that of the negative control and effectively prevented the reduction of elastin and superoxide dismutase by UV irradiation. In conclusion, the DCPmod-SLN system presented is a good candidate for topical Rpal delivery.
Life-long caloric restriction reduces oxidative stress and preserves nitric oxide bioavailability and function in arteries of old mice.
Department of Integrative Physiology, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Geriatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; Veteran's Affairs Medical Center-Salt Lake City, Geriatrics Research Education and Clinical Center, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; Department of Exercise and Sports Science, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
Aging impairs arterial function through oxidative stress and diminished nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability. Life-long caloric restriction (CR) reduces oxidative stress, but its impact on arterial aging is incompletely understood. We tested the hypothesis that life-long CR attenuates key features of arterial aging. Blood pressure, pulse wave velocity (PWV, arterial stiffness), carotid artery wall thickness and endothelium-dependent dilation (EDD; endothelial function) were assessed in young (Y: 5-7 month), old ad libitum (Old AL: 30-31 month) and life-long 40% CR old (30-31 month) B6D2F1 mice. Blood pressure was elevated with aging (P &lt; 0.05) and was blunted by CR (P &lt; 0.05 vs. Old AL). PWV was 27% greater in old vs. young AL-fed mice (P &lt; 0.05), and CR prevented this increase (P &lt; 0.05 vs. Old AL). Carotid wall thickness was greater with age (P &lt; 0.05), and CR reduced this by 30%. CR effects were associated with amelioration of age-related changes in aortic collagen and elastin. Nitrotyrosine, a marker of cellular oxidative stress, and superoxide production were greater in old AL vs. young (P &lt; 0.05) and CR attenuated these increase. Carotid artery EDD was impaired with age (P &lt; 0.05); CR prevented this by enhancing NO and reducing superoxide-dependent suppression of EDD (Both P &lt; 0.05 vs. Old AL). This was associated with a blunted age-related increase in NADPH oxidase activity and p67 expression, with increases in superoxide dismutase (SOD), total SOD, and catalase activities (All P &lt; 0.05 Old CR vs. Old AL). Lastly, CR normalized age-related changes in the critical nutrient-sensing pathways SIRT-1 and mTOR (P &lt; 0.05 vs. Old AL). Our findings demonstrate that CR is an effective strategy for attenuation of arterial aging.
© 2013 The Anatomical Society and John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.
Pregnancy is associated with a progressive remodeling of the uterine artery. This adaptation is influenced by local and systemic pregnancy-dependent factors. We recently demonstrated that the peptide hormone relaxin mediates uterine artery remodeling in late pregnant rats. The objective of this study in relaxin gene knockout (Rln(-/-)) mice was to test the hypothesis that relaxin deficiency throughout pregnancy disrupts uterine artery remodeling, an effect that is exacerbated by aging and reversed with relaxin treatment. Passive mechanical wall properties and extracellular matrix components were measured using pressure myography, quantitative PCR, and zymography in uterine arteries from pregnant wild-type (Rln(+/+)) and Rln(-/-) mice aged 5 and 8 mo on Days 12.5 and 17.5 pregnancy. In a second study, 8-mo-old Rln(-/-) mice received either placebo or human recombinant relaxin subcutaneously for 5 days from Day 12.5 pregnancy. Relaxin deficiency in pregnancy did not alter uterine artery remodeling in young mice. However, remodeling was impaired in older pregnant Rln(-/-) mice, resulting in significantly stiffer uterine arteries. Uterine arteries of aged Rln(-/-) pregnant mice had increased expression of elastin, whereas several matrix metalloproteinases and cell adhesion molecules were decreased relative to Rln(+/+) mice. Fetal weight was also significantly reduced in Rln(-/-) mice in late pregnancy in both young and old dams, whereas placental weight was unchanged. Arterial stiffness and reduced fetal weight were reversed after relaxin treatment. In conclusion, relaxin deficiency compromises uterine artery remodeling in older pregnant females, increasing the risk of pregnancy complications such as hypertension and intrauterine growth restriction.
Chronic sun exposure causes photoaging, the appearance of prematurely aged skin. This phenomenon is characterized by progressive alteration of the dermal extracellular matrix, including elastin and collagen fibers. While many cosmeceuticals claim to improve the appearance of photoaged skin, data are lacking regarding their ability to induce molecular responses associated with wrinkle effacement, particularly increased collagen production.
Hundred subjects enrolled in five separate studies of cosmeceuticals containing: L-ascorbic acid, pentapeptide, α-lipoic acid, yeast extract, or 1% idebenone. Five groups consisting of 16-20 volunteers applied one cosmeceutical to their photodamaged forearms for several weeks. Punch biopsies were obtained pretreatment and post-treatment and analyzed for type I procollagen by ELISA.
Hypo-collagenesis was the only factor that influenced treatment outcome. This study therefore identifies hypo-collagenesis as the unique parameter predicting anti-aging cosmeceutical treatment outcome. These findings provide a basis for future cosmetic testing and the potential development of custom formula skin care.
Aged, 80 and over
The ageing of the vascular tree is a fundamental reflection of biological ageing in general and a determinant of organ function. In the arterial wall this is characterized by a reduction in the elastin content, as well as by an increased content of collagen and its cross-linkages, leading to increased arterial stiffness and elevated central as well as brachial blood pressure, accompanied by increased SBP variability. In recent years a better understanding of these processes have led to the proposal of a condition named early vascular ageing (EVA) in patients with increased arterial stiffness for their age and sex. This is a condition that could increase cardiovascular risk and is associated with various degrees of cognitive dysfunction, as well as other features of biological ageing. This brief review aims to give an update on EVA and how the concept can be used in clinical practice.
Discovery, synthetic methodology, and biological evaluation for antiphotoaging activity of bicyclic[1,2,3]triazoles: in vitro and in vivo studies.
Department of Medicinal and Applied Chemistry,‡Department of Biotechnology, §School of Pharmacy, and ⊥Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University , Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
Novel bicyclic[1,2,3]triazoles (4, 7, 11, 15) have been synthesized using a one-pot metal free strategy with high structural diversity as photoprotective agents, and their effect on UVA-induced senescence in human dermal fibroblast cells (FB) and the associated mechanism are delineated. 11d plus UVA can induce a decrease in reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) activity but an increase in adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthesis and mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨmt). The mRNA levels of six senescence-associated genes, matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1), was decreased, while elastin, procollagen I type I, fibronectin, COL1α1, and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) were increased. 11d plus UVA also decreased MMP-1 and increased TIMP-1 protein levels. Additionally, the thickness of the murine dorsal skin and epidermis, by UVA, was decreased by topical 11d treatment. Our results indicate that bicyclic[1,2,3]triazoles protect UVA-induced senescence-like characteristics in FB cells, which may provide potential prevention against photoaging.
Aging is the result of several mechanisms which operate simultaneously. Among them, glycation is of particular interest because it is a reaction which affects slowly renewing tissues and macromolecules with elevated half-life, like the dermis, a skin compartment highly affected by aging. Glycation produces crosslinks between macromolecules thereby providing an explanation for the increased age-related stiffness of the skin. Glycation products, also called AGEs (advanced glycation end products), accumulate primarily in extracellular matrix molecules like collagen or elastin.
This system allowed us to uncover biological modifications of dermal markers, and more surprisingly epidermal markers, as well as an increase of metalloproteinases responsible for degradation of the dermal matrix. Consequently, the imbalance between synthesis and degradation that results from glycation, may contribute to skin aging, as shown in this model. Moreover these modifications were shown to be prevented by the addition of aminoguanidine, a well-known inhibitor of glycation.
Using this experimental approach our results taken together stress the importance and possibly central role of glycation in skin aging and the usefulness of the reconstructed skin as a model of physiological aging.
Aminoguanidine and aortic wall mechanics, structure, and composition in aged rats.
With aging, the aortic wall becomes stiffer. This could be because of changes in wall stress or composition. We investigated whether a specific change in wall composition, ie, accumulation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs) on the extracellular matrix, is a major factor. We measured aortic mechanics, geometry, and composition in 3-, 10-, 15-, 20-, and 30-month-old inbred normotensive Wistar-Glaxo/Rijswick rats and in a group of 30-month-old rats treated from 20 months onward with aminoguanidine (AG, 42 mg/kg per day), an inhibitor of AGE formation. Thoracoabdominal aortic (pressure) pulse-wave velocity (PWV) increased progressively with age (44% from 3 to 30 months). This age-related increase in aortic PWV was not related to changes in wall stress. For all ages, central (and peripheral) aortic mean blood pressures were not statistically different. Dilatation occurred (18% increase in internal diameter from 3 to 30 months), but this was accompanied by outward hypertrophic remodeling, with an increase in the medial cross-sectional area of 95% and in the ratio of medial thickness to internal diameter of 29%. Wall stress decreased with age (-34%). There was an increase in the ratio of elastic modulus (calculated from the Moens-Korteweg equation) to wall stress (calculated from the Lamé equation, 117% from 3 to 30 months), suggesting that a change in the composition of the wall is responsible for the age-linked increase in wall stiffness. Dry weight decreased slightly but significantly (-14%) with age. Total protein, elastin, collagen, and nonscleroprotein protein [total-(elastin+collagen)] contents did not change with age, but calculated densities of all 4 were halved (as the medial cross-sectional area doubled). The elastin/collagen ratio was statistically similar at all ages. The only significant effect of AG treatment was a fall in PWV (-20%), leading to a fall in the elastic modulus/wall stress ratio (-27% at 10 months of AG treatment versus 30 months of no treatment). In conclusion, the age-related increase in aortic wall stiffness is prevented by 10 months of treatment with AG, which has no effect on wall stress or composition, suggesting that AG may improve aortic wall stiffness by lowering the degree of AGE-induced cross-linking of the extracellular matrix scleroproteins, such as collagen.
Sandre J
Faculty of Medicine, Tissular and Cellular Imaging Center (URCA), Reims, France.
Skin aging is characterized by deterioration of the dermal collagen fiber network due to both decreased collagen expression and increased collagenolytic activity. We designed and evaluated in vitro and ex vivo the efficacy of a trifunctional peptide (TFP) to restore collagen and elastin fibers. TFP was constituted of an elastokine motif (VGVAPG)3, able to increase matrix constituent expression through the stimulation of the elastin-binding protein receptor, a GIL tripeptide occupying matrix metalloproteinase-1 subsites, and a RVRL linker domain acting as a competitive substrate for urokinase. The effects of TFP on type I, type III collagens, and elastin expression in dermal fibroblasts were determined by quantitative real-time reverse-transcriptase-PCR and western blotting. TFP's inhibitory capacity against MMP-1, plasmin, and urokinase was assessed using synthetic substrates, immunohistochemistry, and skin tissue sections as natural substrates. A skin explant model was used to recapitulate aging-induced dermal changes along culture extent. Collagen and elastin fiber structure was analyzed by two-photon fluorescence, second harmonic generation, and confocal microscopies. Compared with the different sections constituting the full peptide, we found that TFP activated the production of matrix constituents while inhibiting MMP-1 in vitro and ex vivo. It also induced a proper fiber network organization, reflecting the potency of TFP in skin remodeling and regeneration.
Chronic exposure to ultraviolet (UV) irradiation is believed to be the major cause of skin damage that results in premature aging of the skin, so called photoaging, characterized by increases in skin thickness, formation of wrinkles, and loss of skin elasticity. UV induces damage to skin mainly by oxidative stress and collagen degradation. In this study, we examined the photo-protective effect of hydroxysafflor yellow A (HSYA), a major active chemical component isolated from Carthamus tinctorius L., by topical application on the skin of mice. Exposure of the dorsal depilated skin of mice to UV radiation four times a week for 10 weeks induced epidermal hyperplasia, elastin accumulation, collagen degradation, etc. HSYA at the doses of 50, 100, and 200 μg/mouse was topically applied immediately following each UV exposure. The effects of HSYA were evaluated by a series of tests, including macroscopic and histopathological evaluation of skin, pinch test, and redox homeostasis of skin homogenates. Results showed that the UV-induced skin damage was significantly improved after HSYA treatment, especially at doses of 100 and 200 μg/mouse. This protective effect is possibly related to the anti-oxidative property of HSYA and mediated by promoting endogenous collagen synthesis. This is the first study providing preclinical evidence for the protective effect of HSYA against photoaging.
Staining and Labeling
Protective effects of equol and their polyphenolic isomers against dermal aging: microarray/protein evidence with clinical implications and unique delivery into human skin.
Department of Physiology, Developmental Biology and the Neuroscience Center, Brigham Young University , Provo, UT , USA.
Equol is a polyphenolic/isoflavonoid molecule that can be expressed as isomers. However, the characteristics of the equol isomers on dermal gene/protein expression and human skin percutaneous absorption remain unknown.
Perform a comprehensive investigation on equol as: R-equol, racemic equol or S-equol to determine their differential expression of skin-related genes, quantify collagen expression and determine percutaneous absorption in human skin.
Quantified: (i) gene expression/mRNA levels via gene array technology using human skin equivalents with equol exposure at 1.2% in qPCR experiments, (ii) in vitro collagen expression in human fibroblasts, and (iii) percutaneous absorption by Franz cell techniques.
In the qPCR studies, only three genes displayed the greatest significant expression by S-equol, whereas 16 genes displayed the greatest significant levels (either stimulation or inhibition) by R-equol and/or racemic equol, such as extracellular matrix proteins (i.e., collagen and elastin), nerve growth factor, aging genes [FOS, 100 A8 and A9 calcium-binding proteins, 5α-reductase type 1, and matrix metalloproteinases (1, 3, and 9)], and inflammatory genes (e.g., interleukin-1 alpha, interleukin-6, and cyclooxygenase-1). Collagen type I expression in fibroblasts was greater with racemic versus S-equol treatment at 1 and 10 nM. Percutaneous absorption demonstrated high sequestering in keratinocytes with subsequent accumulation/release over time.
Overall, these results illustrate the significant differences in mirror-image molecules or isomers of equol where R-equol and/or racemic equol are better molecules for skin gene expression compared to S-equol and the percutaneous absorption of equol represents a unique epidermal reservoir delivery mechanism.
Although it has long been established that the extracellular matrix acts as a mechanical support, its degradation products, which mainly accumulate during aging, have also been demonstrated to play an important role in cell physiology and the development of cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. In the current study, we show that elastin-derived peptides (EDPs) may be involved in the development of insulin resistance (IRES) in mice. In chow-fed mice, acute or chronic intravenous injections of EDPs induced hyperglycemic effects associated with glucose uptake reduction and IRES in skeletal muscle, liver, and adipose tissue. Based on in vivo, in vitro, and in silico approaches, we propose that this IRES is due to interaction between the insulin receptor (IR) and the neuraminidase-1 subunit of the elastin receptor complex triggered by EDPs. This interplay was correlated with decreased sialic acid levels on the β-chain of the IR and reduction of IR signaling. In conclusion, this is the first study to demonstrate that EDPs, which mainly accumulate with aging, may be involved in the insidious development of IRES.
Histologic and histometric study of the aortic media in dissecting aneurysm. Comparison with true aneurysm and age-matched controls.
We studied the histologic and histometric features of the aortic media in cases of dissecting aneurysm in order to clarify the pathologic background of this condition. The results were then compared with cases of true aneurysm and control specimens of "normal" aging aorta. Most cases of dissecting aneurysm and true aneurysm, as well as a number of control specimens, showed severe cystic medial necrosis, and therefore this feature does not appear to be specific to dissecting aneurysm. Fibrosis was noted in the process of repair of medionecrosis in dissecting aneurysm, true aneurysm, and controls. The main pathologic features of the aortic media in dissecting aneurysm included a higher grade of elastin fragmentation (offensive factor) and less fibrosis (defensive factor). Our findings indicate that the pathologic balance between these offensive and defensive factors is an important consideration when evaluating the pathogenesis of dissecting aneurysm.
The effect of glycation on arterial microstructure and mechanical response.
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland, 21250.
Like engineered materials, an artery's biomechanical behavior and function depend on its microstructure. Glycation is associated with both normal aging and diabetes and has been shown to increase arterial stiffness. In this study we examined the direct effect of glycation on the mechanical response of intact arteries and on the mechanical response and structure of elastin isolated from the arteries. Samples of intact arteries and isolated elastin were prepared from porcine aortas and glycated. The mechanical response of all samples was completed using a uniaxial material test system. Glycation levels were measured using ELISA. A confocal microscope was used to image differences in the structure of the glycated and untreated elastin fibers. We found that, under the conditions used in this study, glycation led to decreased stiffness of elastin isolated from arteries, which was associated with a thinning of elastin fibers as imaged by confocal microscopy. We observed no effect of glycation on collagen fibers under our treatment conditions. These results suggest that glycation leads to weakening of the elastin component of arteries that could contribute to vascular defects seen in diabetes and aging. Prevention of glycation reactions may be an important consideration for vascular health later in life. © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater Res Part A: 102A: 2565-2572, 2014.
The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) and its soluble forms are predominantly expressed in lung but its physiological importance in this organ is not yet fully understood. Since RAGE acts as a cell adhesion molecule, we postulated its physiological importance in the respiratory mechanics. Respiratory function in a buffer-perfused isolated lung system and biochemical parameters of the lung were studied in young, adult, and old RAGE knockout (RAGE-KO) mice and wild-type (WT) mice. Lungs from RAGE-KO mice showed a significant increase in the dynamic lung compliance and a decrease in the maximal expiratory air flow independent of age-related changes. We also determined lower mRNA and protein levels of elastin in lung tissue of RAGE-KO mice. RAGE deficiency did not influence the collagen protein level, lung capillary permeability, and inflammatory parameters (TNF-α, high-mobility group box protein 1) in lung. Overexpressing RAGE as well as soluble RAGE in lung fibroblasts or cocultured lung epithelial cells increased the mRNA expression of elastin. Moreover, immunoprecipitation studies indicated a trans interaction of RAGE in lung epithelial cells. Our findings suggest the physiological importance of RAGE and its soluble forms in supporting the respiratory mechanics in which RAGE trans interactions and the influence on elastin expression might play an important role.
A stereologic study of the plantar fat pad in young and aged rats.
Plantar fat pad (PFP) is a tissue structure that absorbs the initial impact of walking and running and ultimately bears body weight at standing. This study was designed to quantify the histomorphological changes of the PFP in aged rats. The most medial PFP was dissected from the hind feet of young rats (4 months old, n = 6) and aged rats (24 months old, n = 6). Histological structure and cellular senescence of PFP were analyzed stereologically and histomorphometrically. Immunohistochemistry of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) was also performed on PFP tissue sections. Compared with young rats, the thickness of epidermis, dermis and septa of the PFP were significantly reduced in the aged rats. The total volume of adipose tissue in the PFP of aged rats was only about 65% of that in the young rats. The microvascular density and the number of fat pad units (FPU), a cluster of adipocytes enclosed by elastin septa, in the PFP were unchanged in the aged rats. In the aged rats, the number of adipocytes per FPU was reduced but the number of simple adipocyte clusters, without surrounding septa, was increased. The shift of the types of adipocyte clusters in the aged PFP was accompanied by degradation of elastin fibers and increased expression of MMP9. In conclusion, the PFP, particularly the elastic septa, degenerates significantly in aged rats and this may contribute to the pathology of PFP-related diseases.
The ultrastructure and biochemistry of meniscal cartilage.
Department of Musculoskeletal Research, Cleveland Clinic Foundation Research Institute, Ohio 44195.
The meniscus is characterized at the light microscopic and ultrastructural levels by thick collagen fibers that are predominantly circumferential in orientation. The extracellular matrix of the meniscus is composed mainly of collagen, with smaller quantities of proteoglycans, matrix glycoproteins, and elastin. The collagen is predominantly Type I, with smaller quantities of Types II, III, and V. The proteoglycans are mainly large, aggregating proteoglycans with chondroitin sulfate as their dominant glycosaminoglycan. A small proportion of small dermatan sulfate proteoglycans is probably present. The matrix glycoproteins include the link proteins, the 116-k protein, and a group of adhesive or potentially adhesive proteins that includes Type VI collagen (here classified as a glycoprotein with a collagenous domain), fibronectin, and thrombospondin. The fibrochondrocytes of the meniscus appear to have considerable potential to respond to growth and other modulating factors in the repair or regeneration of the tissue.
The effect of oxidation on the mechanical response and microstructure of porcine aortas.
Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS), a product of many cellular functions, has been implicated in many age-related pathophysiological processes, including cardiovascular disease. The arterial proteins collagen and elastin may also undergo structural and functional changes due to damage caused by ROS. This study examined the effect of oxidation on the mechanical response of porcine aortas and aorta elastin and the associated changes in structural protein ultrastructure as a step in exploring the role of molecular changes in structural proteins with aging on elastic artery function. We examined the change in mechanical properties of aorta samples after various oxidation times as a first step in understanding how the oxidative environment associated with aging could impact mechanical properties of arterial structural proteins. We used confocal microscopy to visualize how the microstructure of isolated elastin changed with oxidation. We find that short term oxidation of elastin isolated from aortas leads to an increase in material stiffness, but also an increase in the fiber diameter, increase in void space in the matrix, and a decrease in the fiber orientation, possibly due to fiber crosslinking. The short term effects of oxidation on arterial collagen is more complex, with increase in material stiffness seen in the collagen region of the stress stretch curve at low extents of oxidation, but not at high levels of oxidation. These results may provide insight into the relationship between oxidative damage to tissue associated with aging and disease, structure of the arterial proteins elastin and collagen, and arterial mechanical properties and function.
Solar UV irradiation and dermal photoaging.
The skin is increasingly exposed to ambient UV-irradiation thus increasing risks for photooxidative damage with long-term detrimental effects like photoaging, characterized by wrinkles, loss of skin tone and resilience. Photoaged skin displays alterations in the cellular component and extracellular matrix with accumulation of disorganized elastin and its microfibrillar component fibrillin in the deep dermis and a severe loss of interstitial collagens, the major structural proteins of the dermal connective tissue. The unifying pathogenic agents for these changes are UV-generated reactive oxygen species (ROS) which deplete and damage non-enzymatic and enzymatic antioxidant defense systems of the skin. As well as causing permanent genetic changes, ROS activate cytoplasmic signal transduction pathways in resident fibroblasts that are related to growth, differentiation, senescence and connective tissue degradation. This review focuses on the role of UV-induced ROS in the photodamage of the skin resulting in clinical and biochemical characteristics of photoaging. In addition, the relationship of photoaging to intrinsic aging of the skin will be briefly discussed. A decrease in the overall ROS load by efficient sunscreens or other protective agents may represent promising strategies to prevent or at least minimize ROS-induced photoaging.
The anatomic, biochemical, and physical changes occurring in the skin with aging are reviewed and discussed. An attempt is made to distinguish between changes resulting from accumulated injury from environmental factors and the changes of aging per se.
Cytochemical visualization of anions in collagenous and elastic fiber-associated connective tissue matrix in neonatal and adult rat lungs using iron-containing stains.
The cytochemical reactivity of pulmonary connective tissue matrix component in neonatal and adult rat was evaluated using high iron diamine (HID) to detect sulfate ester end groups and dialyzed iron (DI) to detect sulfated and carboxylated end groups of complex carbohydrates, including glycoproteins and glycosaminoglycans at the ultrastructural level. The HID reaction product, in the form of discrete 5-12 nm silver particles following appropriate intensification with thiocarbohydrazide-silver proteinate, was found associated with cell surfaces, the elastin component of elastic fibers, and at regular intervals along the length of collagen fibers in large airways and deep lung interstitium. Staining was similar in adult and neonatal rats, except in areas where connective tissues were presumably still rapidly developing in the neonatal animals. Here large gaps or spaces containing filamentous structures were observed between collagen and elastic fibers. The distribution of DI-reactive sites was similar to that seen with HID with the exception of elastic fibers in which only the microfibrillar portion stained. The collagen-associated reaction was not regularly disposed like that stained with HID, but rather it formed a tight continuous density around the fiber. These results indicated the presence and location of glycoproteins and glycosaminoglycans in connective tissue ground substance regions prior to the full development of elastic and collagenous elements in neonatal pulmonary airways and parenchyma. They also demonstrate cytochemically the presence of a sulfate ester-containing complex sugar found associated with the elastin component of elastic fibers in the lung.
Staining and Labeling/methods
Autophagy is an intracellular degradative system that is believed to be involved in the aging process. The contribution of autophagy to age-related changes in the human skin is unclear. In this study, we examined the relationship between autophagy and skin aging. Transmission electron microscopy and immunofluorescence microscopy analyses of skin tissue and cultured dermal fibroblasts derived from women of different ages revealed an increase in the number of nascent double-membrane autophagosomes with age. Western blot analysis showed that the amount of LC3-II, a form associated with autophagic vacuolar membranes, was significantly increased in aged dermal fibroblasts compared with that in young dermal fibroblasts. Aged dermal fibroblasts were minimally affected by inhibition of autophagic activity. Although lipofuscin autofluorescence was elevated in aged dermal fibroblasts, the expression of Beclin-1 and Atg5-genes essential for autophagosome formation-was similar between young and aged dermal fibroblasts, suggesting that the increase of autophagosomes in aged dermal fibroblasts was due to impaired autophagic flux rather than an increase in autophagosome formation. Treatment of young dermal fibroblasts with lysosomal protease inhibitors, which mimic the condition of aged dermal fibroblasts with reduced autophagic activity, altered the fibroblast content of type I procollagen, hyaluronan and elastin, and caused a breakdown of collagen fibrils. Collectively, these findings suggest that the autophagy pathway is impaired in aged dermal fibroblasts, which leads to deterioration of dermal integrity and skin fragility.
Variations of dissection properties and mass fractions with thrombus age in human abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Thrombus ages, defined as four relative age phases, are related to different compositions of the intraluminal thrombus (ILT) in the abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) (Tong et al., 2011b). Experimental studies indicate a correlation between the relative thrombus age and the strength of the thrombus-covered wall.
On 32 AAA samples we performed peeling tests with the aim to dissect the material (i) through the ILT thickness, (ii) within the individual ILT layers and (iii) within the aneurysm wall underneath the thrombus by using two extension rates (1mm/min, 1mm/s). Histological investigations and mass fraction analysis were performed to characterize the dissected morphology, to determine the relative thrombus age, and to quantify dry weight percentages of elastin and collagen in the AAA wall.
A remarkably lower dissection energy was needed to dissect within the individual ILT layers and through the thicknesses of old thrombi. With increasing ILT age the dissection energy of the underlying intima-media composite continuously decreased and the anisotropic dissection properties for that composite vanished. The quantified dissection properties were rate dependent for both tissue types (ILT and wall). Histology showed that single fibrin fibers or smaller protein clots within the ILT generate smooth dissected surfaces during the peeling. There was a notable decrease in mass fraction of elastin within the thrombus-covered intima-media composite with ILT age, whereas no significant change was found for that of collagen.
These findings suggest that intraluminal thrombus aging leads to a higher propensity of dissection for the ILT and the intima-media composite of the aneurysmal wall.
Global Research and Development, Avon Products Inc., Suffern, New York, USA.
During aging, the reduction of elastic and collagen fibers in dermis can lead to skin atrophy, fragility, and aged appearance, such as increased facial wrinkling and sagging. Microfibril-associated glycoprotein-1 (MAGP-1) is an extracellular matrix protein critical for elastic fiber assembly. It integrates and stabilizes the microfibril and elastin matrix network that helps the skin to endure mechanical stretch and recoil. However, the observation of MAGP-1 during skin aging and its function in the dermis has not been established. To better understand age-related changes in the dermis, we investigated MAGP-1 during skin aging and photoaging, using a combination of in vitro and in vivo studies. Gene expression by microarray was performed using human skin biopsies from young and aged female donors. In addition, immunofluorescence analysis on the MAGP-1 protein was performed in dermal fibroblast cultures and in human skin biopsies. Specific antibodies against MAGP-1 and fibrillin-1 were used to examine protein expression and extracellular matrix structure in the dermis via biopsies from donors of multiple age groups. A reduction of the MAGP-1 gene and protein levels were observed in human skin with increasing age and photoexposure, indicating a loss of the functional MAGP-1 fiber network and a lack of structural support in the dermis. Loss of MAGP-1 around the hair follicle/pore areas was also observed, suggesting a possible correlation between MAGP-1 loss and enlarged pores in aged skin. Our findings demonstrate that a critical "pre-elasticity" component, MAGP-1, declines with aging and photoaging. Such changes may contribute to age-related loss of dermal integrity and perifollicular structural support, which may lead to skin fragility, sagging, and enlarged pores.
Arterial aging is the major contributing factor to increases in the incidence and prevalence of cardiovascular disease, due mainly to the presence of chronic, low-grade, 'sterile' arterial inflammation. Inflammatory signaling driven by the angiotensin II cascade perpetrates adverse age-associated arterial structural and functional remodeling. The aged artery is characterized by endothelial disruption, enhanced vascular smooth muscle cell (VMSC) migration and proliferation, extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, elastin fracture, and matrix calcification/amyloidosis/glycation. Importantly, the molecular mechanisms of arterial aging are also relevant to the pathogenesis of hypertension and atherosclerosis. Age-associated arterial proinflammation is to some extent mutable, and interventions to suppress or delay it may have the potential to ameliorate or retard age-associated arterial diseases.
Susceptibility to glaucoma damage related to age and connective tissue mutations in mice.
The purpose of this research was to study the effects of age and genetic alterations in key connective tissue proteins on susceptibility to experimental glaucoma in mice. We used mice haploinsufficient in the elastin gene (EH) and mice without both alleles of the fibromodulin gene (FM KO) and their wild type (WT) littermates of B6 and CD1 strains, respectively. FM KO mice were tested at two ages: 2 months and 12 months. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was measured by Tonolab tonometer, axial lengths and widths measured by digital caliper post-enucleation, and chronic glaucoma damage was measured using a bead injection model and optic nerve axon counts. IOP in EH mice was not significantly different from WT, but FM KO were slightly lower than their controls (p = 0.04). Loss of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons was somewhat, but not significantly greater in young EH and younger or older FM KO strains than in age-matched controls (p = 0.48, 0.34, 0.20, respectively, multivariable regression adjusting for IOP exposure). Older CD1 mice lost significantly more RGC axons than younger CD1 (p = 0.01, multivariable regression). The CD1 mouse strain showed age-dependence of experimental glaucoma damage to RGC in the opposite, and more expected, direction than in B6 mice in which older mice are more resistant to damage. Genetic alteration in two genes that are constituents of sclera, fibromodulin and elastin do not significantly affect RGC loss.
Oral intake of specific bioactive collagen peptides reduces skin wrinkles and increases dermal matrix synthesis.
Dietary consumption of food supplements has been found to modulate skin functions and can therefore be useful in the treatment of skin aging. However, there is only a limited number of clinical studies supporting these claims. In this double-blind, placebo-controlled study, the effectiveness of the specific bioactive collagen peptide (BCP) VERISOL® on eye wrinkle formation and stimulation of procollagen I, elastin and fibrillin biosynthesis in the skin was assessed. A hundred and fourteen women aged 45-65 years were randomized to receive 2.5 g of BCP or placebo, once daily for 8 weeks, with 57 subjects being allocated to each treatment group. Skin wrinkles were objectively measured in all subjects, before starting the treatment, after 4 and 8 weeks as well as 4 weeks after the last intake (4-week regression phase). A subgroup was established for suction blister biopsies analyzing procollagen I, elastin and fibrillin at the beginning of the treatment and after 8 weeks of intake. The ingestion of the specific BCP used in this study promoted a statistically significant reduction of eye wrinkle volume (p &lt; 0.05) in comparison to the placebo group after 4 and 8 weeks (20%) of intake. Moreover a positive long-lasting effect was observed 4 weeks after the last BCP administration (p &lt; 0.05). Additionally, after 8 weeks of intake a statistically significantly higher content of procollagen type I (65%) and elastin (18%) in the BCP-treated volunteers compared to the placebo-treated patients was detected. For fibrillin, a 6% increase could be determined after BCP treatment compared to the placebo, but this effect failed to reach the level of statistical significance. In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that the oral intake of specific bioactive collagen peptides (Verisol®) reduced skin wrinkles and had positive effects on dermal matrix synthesis.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
Fibroblasts behavior after N-acetylcysteine and amino acids exposure: extracellular matrix gene expression.
Abstract Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are chemically reactive molecules with impaired electrons that make them unstable and able to react easily with a great variety of molecules. The main targets of ROS are DNA, proteins, and membrane phospholipids. In the skin, ROS are able to affect the production of collagen and elastin, the main components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). This action contributes to the skin's aging. N-Acetylcysteine (NAC) is an acetylated cysteine residue with excellent anti-oxidant activity that boosts glutathione (GSH) levels. This study evaluates the effect of a solution of NAC and amino acids, which is used in aesthetic medicine as an intra-dermal injective treatment, on fibroblast behavior. To this aim, the expression levels of some ECM-related genes (HAS1, HYAL1 ELN, ELANE, MMP2, MMP3, MMP13, COL1A1, COL3A1) were analyzed on cultured dermal fibroblasts using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). All but two collagen genes were up-regulated after 24 hr of treatment.
A custom image-based analysis tool for quantifying elastin and collagen micro-architecture in the wall of the human aorta from multi-photon microscopy.
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Center for Vascular Remodeling and Regeneration, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Center for Vascular Remodeling and Regeneration, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Center for Vascular Remodeling and Regeneration, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Center for Vascular Remodeling and Regeneration, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Electronic address: vorp@pitt.edu.
The aorta possesses a micro-architecture that imparts and supports a high degree of compliance and mechanical strength. Alteration of the quantity and/or arrangement of the main load-bearing components of this micro-architecture - the elastin and collagen fibers - leads to mechanical, and hence functional, changes associated with aortic disease and aging. Therefore, in the future, the ability to rigorously characterize the wall fiber micro-architecture could provide insight into the complicated mechanisms of aortic wall remodeling in aging and disease. Elastin and collagen fibers can be observed using state-of-the-art multi-photon microscopy. Image-analysis algorithms have been effective at characterizing fibrous constructs using various microscopy modalities. The objective of this study was to develop a custom MATLAB-language automated image-based analysis tool to describe multiple parameters of elastin and collagen micro-architecture in human soft fibrous tissue samples using multi-photon microscopy images. Human aortic tissue samples were used to develop the code. The tool smooths, cleans and equalizes fiber intensities in the image before segmenting the fibers into a binary image. The binary image is cleaned and thinned to a fiber skeleton representation of the image. The developed software analyzes the fiber skeleton to obtain intersections, fiber orientation, concentration, porosity, diameter distribution, segment length and tortuosity. In the future, the developed custom image-based analysis tool can be used to describe the micro-architecture of aortic wall samples in a variety of conditions. While this work targeted the aorta, the software has the potential to describe the architecture of other fibrous materials, tube-like networks and connective tissues.
There is substantial evidence that ultraviolet radiation induces the formation of reactive oxygen species which are implicated as toxic intermediates in the pathogenesis of photoaging. The aim of this study was to determine whether repeated topical treatment with benzoyl peroxide, a source of free radicals, produced the same cutaneous effects as chronic ultraviolet B radiation. Three concentrations of benzoyl peroxide (0.1, 1.5, 5.0% wt/wt) and three cumulative fluences of ultraviolet B radiation (0.9, 2.2, 5.1 J per cm2) used alone and in all combinations along with appropriate controls. Female SKH1 (hr/hr) albino hairless mice were treated 5 d per wk for 12 wk. Extracellular matrix molecules and histologic parameters were assessed. Ultraviolet B radiation induced a fluence-dependent and time-dependent increase in skin-fold thickness. Fluence dependence was seen for epidermal thickness, sunburn cell numbers, dermal thickness, glycosaminoglycan content, mast cell numbers, and skin-fold thickness. Benzoyl peroxide treatment alone caused less marked increases in epidermal and dermal measures compared with ultraviolet B under the conditions used. A benzoyl peroxide concentration-dependent increase was only observed for elastin content, although the highest concentration of benzoyl peroxide increased epidermal thickness and glycosaminoglycan content. A synergistic interaction between ultraviolet B and benzoyl peroxide was not found. These results indicate that repeated administration of benzoyl peroxide produces skin changes in the hairless mouse that qualitatively resemble those produced by ultraviolet B and suggest that common mechanisms may be involved. In addition, any potential synergistic effect of ultraviolet B and benzoyl peroxide was below the level of detection used in this study.
A hypothesis about a mechanism for the programming of blood pressure and vascular disease in early life.
1. There is now a great deal of evidence that people whose weight at birth was low tend to have higher blood pressure and increased risk of death from cardiovascular disease as adults. 2. We argue that, in fetuses whose growth is impaired, synthesis of elastin in the walls of the aorta and large arteries is deficient and that this deficiency leads to permanent changes in the mechanical properties of these vessels. 3. Over a lifetime, such changes could predispose an individual to higher blood pressure and cardiovascular disease.
4-Hydroxynonenal impairs transforming growth factor-β1-induced elastin synthesis via epidermal growth factor receptor activation in human and murine fibroblasts.
Elastin is a long-lived protein and a key component of connective tissues. The tissular elastin content decreases during chronological aging, and the mechanisms underlying its slow repair are not known. Lipid oxidation products that accumulate in aged tissues may generate protein dysfunction. We hypothesized that 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE), a highly reactive α,β-aldehydic product generated from polyunsaturated fatty acid peroxidation, could contribute to inhibiting elastin repair by antagonizing the elastogenic signaling of transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) in skin fibroblasts. We report that a low 4-HNE concentration (2µmol/L) inhibits the upregulation of tropoelastin expression stimulated by TGF-β1 in human and murine fibroblasts. The study of signaling pathways potentially involved in the regulation of elastin expression showed that 4-HNE did not block the phosphorylation of Smad3, an early step of TGF-β1 signaling, but inhibited the nuclear translocation of Smad2. Concomitantly, 4-HNE modified and stimulated the phosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and subsequently ERK1/2 activation, leading to the phosphorylation/stabilization of the Smad transcriptional corepressor TGIF, which antagonizes TGF-β1 signaling. Inhibitors of EGFR (AG1478) and MEK/ERK (PD98059), and EGFR-specific siRNAs, reversed the inhibitory effect of 4-HNE on TGF-β1-induced nuclear translocation of Smad2 and tropoelastin synthesis. In vivo studies on aortas from aged C57BL/6 mice showed that EGFR is modified by 4-HNE, in correlation with an increased 4-HNE-adduct accumulation and decreased elastin content. Altogether, these data suggest that 4-HNE inhibits the elastogenic activity of TGF-β1, by modifying and activating the EGFR/ERK/TGIF pathway, which may contribute to altering elastin repair in chronological aging and oxidative stress-associated aging processes.
More aging adults and the social acceptance of aesthetic treatments have increased the demand for minimally invasive aesthetic treatments. Skin resurfacing is very effective at improving aging symptoms, including wrinkles and skin imperfections. Following the negative effects of full skin resurfacing, in addition to a very long downtime, fractional lasers and fractional radiofrequency (RF) technologies were introduced, since gaining popularity. Their efficacy, along with minimal downtime, has enabled an effective and safer treatment. A novel technology based on fractional Hybrid Energy™ (HE), combines RF and an additional electrical energy for enhancing the thermal effect.
This study evaluated the morphological and histological effects of the new HE technology on epidermal and dermal skin layers, using an ex-vivo human skin model.
Human skin samples were collected and treated ex-vivo with the HE applicator. The effect was evaluated by skin histology and quantitative analysis by assays of collagen fibers, elastin and glycosaminoglycan (GAGs) dosages, reflecting the hyaluronic acid content, in addition to epidermal mitotic index evaluation.
Histology demonstrated immediate and long-term HE effects on both epidermal and dermal skin layers with a direct correlation between the treatment parameters and effects. Results demonstrated a significant increase of the epidermal mitotic index, significant dermal collagen remodeling and significant increases in both epidermal and dermal GAGs.
HE technology significantly affected collagen remodeling and an increase in mid to deep dermis GAGs in addition to epidermal mitotic index, resulting in long term structural and biochemical dermal and epidermal improvement.
Chronic aerobic exercise training attenuates aortic stiffening and endothelial dysfunction through preserving aortic mitochondrial function in aged rats.
Department of Gynecology, Chengyang People's Hospital, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China.
Department of Neurology, Chengyang People's Hospital, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China.
Aging leads to large vessel arterial stiffening and endothelial dysfunction, which are important determinants of cardiovascular risk. The aim of present work was to assess the effects of chronic aerobic exercise training on aortic stiffening and endothelial dysfunction in aged rats and investigate the underlying mechanism about mitochondrial function. Chronic aerobic exercise training attenuated aortic stiffening with age marked by reduced collagen concentration, increased elastin concentration and reduced pulse wave velocity (PWV), and prevented aging-related endothelial dysfunction marked by improved endothelium-mediated vascular relaxation of aortas in response to acetylcholine. Chronic aerobic exercise training abated oxidative stress and nitrosative stress in aortas of aged rats. More importantly, we found that chronic aerobic exercise training in old rats preserved aortic mitochondrial function marked by reduced reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation and mitochondrial swelling, increased ATP formation and mitochondrial DNA content, and restored activities of complexes I and III and electron-coupling capacity between complexes I and III and between complexes II and III. In addition, it was found that chronic aerobic exercise training in old rats enhanced protein expression of uncoupling protein 2 (UCP-2), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ co-activator 1α (PGC-1α), manganese superoxide dismutase (Mn-SOD), aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH-2), prohibitin (PHB) and AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) phosphorylation in aortas. In conclusion, chronic aerobic exercise training preserved mitochondrial function in aortas, which, at least in part, explained the aorta-protecting effects of exercise training in aging.
Multiple fractional erbium: yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser sessions for upper facial rejuvenation: clinical and histological implications and expectations.
Fractional photothermolysis is a modern resurfacing technique, in which microscopic zones of thermal injury are created, stimulating turnover of both epidermis and dermis. Fractional laser rejuvenation has been developed to overcome the drawbacks of traditional ablative laser.
To objectively evaluate the effectiveness of multiple sessions of fractional Er:YAG laser rejuvenation for aging upper face clinically, histologically and immunohistochemically.
Ten volunteers asking for facial rejuvenation were subjected to multiple sessions (3-5) of fractional Er:YAG laser. Clinical evaluation with both histopathological and immunohistochemical assessment for skin biopsies was carried out before, after 1 month and 6 months of laser resurfacing. Histometry for epidermal thickness and quantitative assessment for neocollagen formation, collagen I, III, and VII, elastin and tropoelastin were carried out for all skin biopsies.
Comparing before, after 1 month and 6 months of fractional Er:YAG laser resurfacing resulted in improved clinical appearance with increased epidermal thickness (P &lt; 0.001). Dermal collagen showed increased neocollagen formation (P = 0.006), with increased concentration of collagen types I (P &lt; 0.001), III (P &lt; 0.001), and VII (P = 0.001). Dermal elastic tissue studies revealed decreased elastin, while tropoelastin concentration increased after laser resurfacing (P &lt; 0.001). An increase in collagen (I and III) and tropoelastin level and decreased elastin content was encountered with increasing the number of sessions, yet it was not significant.
Multiple sessions are effective in rejuvenation of the aging face with high safety, short downtime, and no adverse effects. They stimulated formation of new collagen (type I, III, and VII) up to 6 months after treatment with better improvement in skin texture and fine wrinkles. The variable number of fractional Er:YAG laser sessions (3-5) showed no significant difference as regards efficacy.
We quantitated the skin elastic fibers of the papillary and reticular dermis using specific staining procedure followed by automated computerized image analysis. Fifty skin biopsies of patients consulting for cardiovascular risk factors were studied. The following parameters were estimated: surface area (% of total surface), length, and number of fibers as a function of age. The evaluation of the skin elastic fiber system showed no significant trend with age in the number of elastic fibers per unit area in the superficial or deep dermis. We found, however, a continuous increase with age in the relative surface area, and the length of the elastic fiber system. These results can best be interpreted as a continuous apposition of elastic-type material to the preexisting fibers by skin fibroblasts. This material may well be of a different composition than young elastin, for instance enriched in structural glycoproteins (microfibrils), lipids and calcium as found in the elastic fibers of aorta and lung. Such quantitative modifications may explain the decrease in skin elasticity, and the continuous increase in stained fibers.
Staining and Labeling
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is an essential element of mammalian organisms, and its cross-linking formation plays a vital role in ECM development and postnatal homeostasis. Defects in cross-link formation caused by aging, genetic, or environmental factors are known to cause numerous diseases in mammals. To augment the cross-linking formation of ECM, the present study established a ZsGreen reporter system controlled by the promoter of lysyl oxidase-like 1 gene (LOXL1), which serves as both a scaffold element and a cross-linking enzyme in the ECM. By using this system in a drug screen, we identified emodin as a strong enhancer of LOXL1 expression that promoted cross-linking formation of ECM in all the tested systems, including human fibroblast cells, cultured human skin tissues, and animals that received long-term emodin treatment. Collectively, the results suggest that emodin may serve as an effective drug or supplement for ECM homeostasis.
Immunological investigations on the antigenic changes of human aortic elastin in aging and atherosclerosis.
Alpha-elastin of human aorta was investigated by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) on the material isolated from aborted human fetuses and healthy subjects killed by accident, assigned to 7 age groups. Samples up to the age of 55 were taken only from regions without detectable changes in the arterial wall, in the 60-75-year age group--both from normal areas and atherosclerotic plaques of the same aortas. An immune serum against alpha-elastin isolated from the normal aortic areas of a 61-year-old subject was produced in sheep. Testing with this serum showed the existence of some antigenic changes in the elastins from different age groups. A prevalence of the species-specific antigenic determinants was observed in alpha-elastin from fetal aorta while in alpha-elastin from the atherosclerotically altered human aorta the cross-reacting antigenic determinants prevailed in its antigenic structure.
Pathological changes in the COPD lung mesenchyme - Novel lessons learned from in vitro and in vivo studies.
Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, and Canada Biology of Breathing Theme, Manitoba Institute of Child Health, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
Division of Respiratory Medicine and Nottingham Respiratory Research Unit, University of Nottingham, Clinical Sciences Building, City Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
University of Groningen, University Medical Centre, Groningen, Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, The Netherlands.
Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; Key Laboratory of Biorheological Science and Technology, Ministry of Education, Bioengineering College, Chongqing University, Shapingba, Chongqing, China.
NHMRC Centre of Research Excellence for Chronic Respiratory Disease and Lung Ageing, School of Medicine, University of Tasmania, Australia.
Department of Pulmonary Physiology and Sleep Medicine, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
Centre for Heart Lung Innovation and Department of Anesthesiology Pharmacology &amp; Therapeutics, University of British Columbia, St Paul's Hospital, 1081 Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC V6Z 1Y6, Canada. Electronic address: Tillie.Hackett@hli.ubc.ca.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is currently the fourth leading cause of death worldwide and, in contrast to the trend for cardiovascular diseases, mortality rates still continue to climb. This increase is in part due to an aging population, being expanded by the "Baby boomer" generation who grew up when smoking rates were at their peak and by people in developing countries living longer. Sadly, there has been a disheartening lack of new therapeutic approaches to counteract the progressive decline in lung function associated with the disease that leads to disability and death. COPD is characterized by irreversible chronic airflow limitation that is caused by emphysematous destruction of lung elastic tissue and/or obstruction in the small airways due to occlusion of their lumen by inflammatory mucus exudates, narrowing and obliteration. These lesions are mainly produced by the response of the tissue to the repetitive inhalational injury inflicted by noxious gases, including cigarette smoke, which involves interaction between infiltrating inflammatory immune cells, resident cells (e.g. epithelial cells and fibroblasts) and the extra cellular matrix. This interaction leads to tissue destruction and airway remodeling with changes in elastin and collagen, such that the epithelial-mesenchymal trophic unit is dysregulated in both the disease pathologies. This review focuses on: 1 - novel inflammatory and remodeling factors that are altered in COPD; 2 - in vitro and in vivo models to understand the mechanism whereby the extra cellular matrix environment in altered in COPD; and 3 - COPD in the context of wound-repair tissue responses, with a focus on the regulation of mesenchymal cell fate and phenotype.
Dichotomous mechanisms of aortic stiffening in high-fat diet fed young and old B6D2F1 mice.
Department of Exercise and Sports Science, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
Abstract Advancing age is associated with increased stiffness of large elastic arteries as assessed by aortic pulse wave velocity (PWV). Greater PWV, associated with increased risk of cardiovascular diseases, may result from altered expression of the extracellular matrix proteins, collagen and elastin, as well as cross-linking of proteins by advanced glycation end products (AGEs). Indeed, aortic PWV is greater in old (28-31 months) normal chow (NC, 16% fat by kcal)-fed male B6D2F1 mice compared with young (Y: 5-7 months) NC-fed mice (397 ± 8 vs. 324 ± 14 cm/s, P &lt; 0.05). Aging also induces a
40% reduction in medial elastin assessed by Verhoeff's Van Geison stain, as well as a 90% greater abundance of AGEs in the aorta (P &lt; 0.05). The typical American diet contains high dietary fat and may contribute to the etiology of arterial stiffening. To that end, we hypothesized that the age-associated detriments in arterial stiffening are exacerbated in the face of high dietary fat. In young animals, high-fat (40% fat by kcal) diet increases aortic stiffness by 120 ± 18 cm/s relative to age-matched NC-fed mice (P &lt; 0.001). High-fat was without effect on aortic collagen or AGEs content in young animals; however, elastin was greatly reduced (
30%) after high-fat in young mice. In old animals, high-fat increased aortic stiffness by 108 ± 47 cm/s but was without effect on total collagen content, medial elastin, or AGEs. These data demonstrate that both aging and high-fat diet increase aortic stiffness, and although a reduction in medial elastin may underlie increased stiffness in young mice, stiffening of the aorta in old mice after high-fat diet does not appear to result from a similar structural modification.
Matrix metalloproteinase-12 immunolocalization in the degenerating human intervertebral disc and sand rat spine: Biologic implications.
Matrix metalloproteinase-12 (MMP-12; macrophage metalloelastase) degrades a number of extracellular matrix components which are present in the intervertebral disc, including type IV collagen, fibronectin, laminin, chondroitin sulfates, elastin and fibrinogen. MMP-12 has recently discovered relationships with cytokines and chemokines which also relate to disc cell biology. To date, no study has assessed immunolocalization of MMP-12 in degenerating human intervertebral disc tissue. Immunocytochemical localization was performed on 18 human disc specimens and on lumbar spines of the sand rat, a small animal model with well-recognized age-related disc degeneration. In the human disc, intracellular localization was present in both the annulus and nucleus portions of the disc. The sand rat degenerating disc also showed MMP-12 disc localization, with additional presence in chondrocytes of the vertebral endplate of older animals. This is the initial characterization of the presence of MMP-12 in the human and sand rat disc, and in chondrocytes of the vertebral endplate in older sand rats with degenerating discs. Findings are important because they document the presence of an additional MMP-12 in disc tissue, thus expanding our understanding of disc extracellular matrix remodeling, and because they provide novel information on the presence of MMP-12 in the cartilage endplate as it undergoes sclerosis during disc degeneration in the aging sand rat.
Disc degeneration; Endplate sclerosis; MMP-2; Sand rat
The mechanisms of aging and of age-dependent pathologies can be studied at the tissue level. Such studies concern cell aging within tissues, where cells are surrounded by their matrix. Matrix components undergo post-synthetic modifications such as the Maillard reaction and proteolytic degradations. Finally, cell matrix interactions, mediated by cell membrane receptors also undergo age-dependent modifications. These three aspects of tissue-aging are discussed succinctly in this review with several examples, as the age-dependent increase of fibronectin and the potential harmful effects of its degradation products and the age-dependent degradation of elastin and the harmful effects of elastin peptides mediated by the elastin-laminin receptor. These examples clearly show the intricate cooperation of gene-mediated processes (increased expression of fibronectin and some elastolytic enzymes) and of post-synthetic processes as the novel properties of fibronectin and elastin derived peptides. Such epigenetic mechanisms appear to play a crucial role in age-dependent tissue alterations and pathologies.
Aging of connective tissues: experimental facts and theoretical considerations.
In this chapter, we describe in detail the age-dependent modifications of connective tissues, separately for their cellular and extracellular compartments. Cell aging was studied by the in vitro method established by Hayflick as well as by ex vivo explant cultures, and results with both methods are discussed. Follows then the description of age changes of macromolecular components of extracellular matrix as well as the decline with age of receptor-mediated cell-matrix interactions. These interactions mediated by several types of receptors, as integrins, the elastin receptor and others, play a crucial role for the definition and regulation of the differentiated cell phenotype. Age-related modifications of both matrix components and receptors are discussed in order to explain the mechanisms of the age-dependent modulations of cell-matrix interactions. Finally, we discuss the relations between age changes of matrix components and the onset of age-related diseases, especially cardiovascular pathologies mostly involved in age-dependence of functions and limitation of longevity.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland - PDF
Rare and common variants in extracellular matrix gene Fibrillin 2 (FBN2) are associated with macular degeneration.
Neurobiology Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory.
Center for Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics and.
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch.
Section of Epithelial and Retinal Physiology and Disease.
Institute for Molecular Biology, University of Oregon and Oregon Retina, Eugene, OR 97401, USA.
Faculty of Medicine, Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and, Public Health, Madison, WI 53726, USA.
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
Center for Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02215, USA, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Moran Eye Center, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Moran Eye Center, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.
Centre for Vision and Vascular Science, Queen's University, Belfast, UK.
Retina Service and Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
The Fred Hollows Foundation, Auckland, New Zealand, School of Social Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
Section of Immunopathology and.
Department of Ophthalmology and.
Departments of Medicine (Section of Biomedical Genetics), Ophthalmology and Biostatistics, Neurology, Epidemiology, Boston University Schools of Medicine and Public Health, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA, Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
Department of Human Genetics and.
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
Oregon Health &amp; Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.
Health Promotion and Development, School of Nursing, 440 Victoria Building, 3500 Victoria St, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute and Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33125, USA.
Macular Degeneration Center, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health and Science, University, Portland, OR 97201, USA.
Department of Ophthalmology and Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
Department of Ophthalmology, and Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 9104, USA.
Department of Human Genetics and Department of Biostatistics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
Clinical Trials Branch, Division of Epidemiology and Clinical Applications, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
Neurobiology Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, swaroopa@nei.nih.gov.
Neurodegenerative diseases affecting the macula constitute a major cause of incurable vision loss and exhibit considerable clinical and genetic heterogeneity, from early-onset monogenic disease to multifactorial late-onset age-related macular degeneration (AMD). As part of our continued efforts to define genetic causes of macular degeneration, we performed whole exome sequencing in four individuals of a two-generation family with autosomal dominant maculopathy and identified a rare variant p.Glu1144Lys in Fibrillin 2 (FBN2), a glycoprotein of the elastin-rich extracellular matrix (ECM). Sanger sequencing validated the segregation of this variant in the complete pedigree, including two additional affected and one unaffected individual. Sequencing of 192 maculopathy patients revealed additional rare variants, predicted to disrupt FBN2 function. We then undertook additional studies to explore the relationship of FBN2 to macular disease. We show that FBN2 localizes to Bruch's membrane and its expression appears to be reduced in aging and AMD eyes, prompting us to examine its relationship with AMD. We detect suggestive association of a common FBN2 non-synonymous variant, rs154001 (p.Val965Ile) with AMD in 10 337 cases and 11 174 controls (OR = 1.10; P-value = 3.79 × 10
). Thus, it appears that rare and common variants in a single gene-FBN2-can contribute to Mendelian and complex forms of macular degeneration. Our studies provide genetic evidence for a key role of elastin microfibers and Bruch's membrane in maintaining blood-retina homeostasis and establish the importance of studying orphan diseases for understanding more common clinical phenotypes.
Published by Oxford University Press 2014. This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.
Interaction between Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1 and Atherosclerosis and Vascular Aging.
Tulane University School of Medicine, Tulane University Heart and Vascular Institute, New Orleans, La., USA.
The process of vascular aging encompasses alterations in the function of endothelial (ECs) and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) via oxidation, inflammation, cell senescence and epigenetic modifications, increasing the probability of atherosclerosis. Aged vessels exhibit decreased endothelial antithrombogenic properties, increased reactive oxygen species generation, inflammatory signaling and migration of VSMCs to the subintimal space, impaired angiogenesis and increased elastin degradation. The key initiating step in atherogenesis is subendothelial accumulation of apolipoprotein B-containing low-density lipoproteins resulting in activation of ECs and recruitment of monocytes. Activated ECs secrete 'chemokines' that interact with cognate chemokine receptors on monocytes and promote directional migration. Recruitment of immune cells establishes a proinflammatory status, further causing elevated oxidative stress, which in turn triggers a series of events including apoptotic or necrotic death of vascular and nonvascular cells. Increased oxidative stress is also considered to be a key factor in mechanisms of aging-associated changes in tissue integrity and function. Experimental evidence indicates that insulin-like growth factor-1 exerts antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and pro-survival effects on the vasculature, reducing atherosclerotic plaque burden and promoting features of atherosclerotic plaque stability. © 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland - PDF
Department of Food and Life Science, Pukyong National University, Busan 608-737, Republic of Korea.
The significant increase in life expectancy is closely related to the growing interest in the impact of aging on the function and appearance of the skin. Skin aging is influenced by several factors, and solar ultraviolet (UV) irradiation is considered one of the most important causes of skin photoaging. The aim of this study was to examine the anti-photoaging role of porphyra-334 from Porphyra (P.) yezoensis, a mycosporine-like amino acid (MAA), using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and electrospray ionization‑mass spectrometry (ESI-MS). In the present study, extracted UV‑absorbing compounds from P. yezoensis included palythine, asterina-330 and porphyra-334. Porphyra-334 was the most abundant MAA in P. yezoensis, and it was therefore used for conducting antiphotoaging experiments. The effect of porphyra-334 on the prevention of photoaging was investigated by measuring reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) levels, as well as extracellular matrix (ECM) components and protein expression in UVA‑irradiated human skin fibroblasts. Porphyra-334 suppressed ROS production and the expression of MMPs following UVA irradiation, while increasing levels of ECM components, such as procollagen, type I collagen, elastin. These results suggest that porphyra-334 has various applications in cosmetics and toiletries because of its anti‑photoaging activities and may serve as a novel anti-aging agent.
Spandidos Publications - PDF
In Vivo Antioxidant and Anti-Skin-Aging Activities of Ethyl Acetate Extraction from Idesia polycarpa Defatted Fruit Residue in Aging Mice Induced by D-Galactose.
National and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Energe Plant Bio-Oil Production and Application, Sichuan Key Laboratory of Resource Biology and Biopharmaceutical Engineering, Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment, Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610064, China.
Two different concentrations of D-galactose (D-gal) induced organism and skin aging in Kunming mice were used to examine comprehensively the antioxidant and antiaging activities of ethyl acetate extraction (EAE) from Idesia polycarpa defatted fruit residue for the first time. The oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) of EAE was 13.09 ± 0.11 μ mol Trolox equivalents (TE)/mg, which showed EAE had great in vitro free radical scavenging and antioxidant activity. Biochemical indexes and morphological analysis of all tested tissues showed that EAE could effectively improve the total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC) of the antioxidant defense system of the aging mice, enhance the activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) of tissues and serum, increase glutathione (GSH) content and decrease the malondialdehyde (MDA) content, and maintain the skin collagen, elastin, and moisture content. Meanwhile, EAE could effectively attenuate the morphological damage in brain, liver, kidney, and skin induced by D-gal and its effect was not less than that of the well-known L-ascorbic acid (VC) and α -tocopherol (VE). Overall, EAE is a potent natural antiaging agent with great antioxidant activity, which can be developed as a new medicine and cosmetic for the treatment of age-related conditions.
Artery bent buckling has been suggested as a possible mechanism that leads to artery tortuosity, which is associated with aging, hypertension, atherosclerosis, and other pathological conditions. It is necessary to understand the relationship between microscopic wall structural changes and macroscopic artery buckling behavior. To this end, the objectives of this study were to develop arterial buckling equations using a microstructure-based 4-fiber reinforced wall model, and to simulate the effects of vessel wall microstructural changes on artery buckling. Our results showed that the critical pressure increased nonlinearly with the axial stretch ratio, and the 4-fiber model predicted higher critical buckling pressures than what the Fung model predicted. The buckling equation using the 4-fiber model captured the experimentally observed reduction of critical pressure induced by elastin degradation and collagen fiber orientation changes in the arterial wall. These results improve our understanding of arterial stability and its relationship to microscopic wall remodeling, and the model provides a useful tool for further studies.
Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University of Ferrara, Via Luigi Borsari 46, 44100, Ferrara, Italy.
Reactive oxygen species production is the final step in skin aging. These unstable molecules can damage and destroy DNA, proteins, and membrane phospholipids. The aim of this study was to test the in vitro effect of an antioxidant precursor, N-acetylcysteine (NAC), on human dermal fibroblasts. NAC alone and a solution of NAC and amino acids together, used in aesthetic medicine as intradermal injection treatment, were tested.
The expression levels of some connective related genes (HAS1, HYAL1, ELN, ELANE, DSP, GDF6, and IGF1) were analyzed on cultures of dermal fibroblasts using real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (real time RT-PCR).
An interesting effect of gene induction by administration of NAC and amino acids in vitro was demonstrated. Upregulation of elastin-, hyaluronic acid-, and GDF6-encoding genes supports the evidence of clinical improvement induced by NAC biostimulation in the prevention and correction of skin aging.
This journal requires that authors assign a level of evidence to each submission to which Evidence-Based Medicine rankings are applicable. This excludes Review Articles, Book Reviews, and manuscripts that concern Basic Science, Animal Studies, Cadaver Studies, and Experimental Studies. For a full description of these Evidence-Based Medicine ratings, please refer to the Table of Contents or the online Instructions to Authors http://www.springer.com/00266 .
Department of Dermatology, University College and Middlesex School of Medicine, London, UK.
Dermal elastic fibres in biopsies taken from sun-exposed involved digital skin and sun-protected uninvolved skin on the medial aspect of the upper arms from 13 patients with systemic sclerosis were examined by light and transmission electron microscopy. For controls, biopsies were taken from similar sites from 4 age- and sex-matched healthy volunteers and 4 patients with primary Raynaud's phenomenon. On light microscopy only the control digital biopsies showed mild actinic changes of the elastic fibres whereas in all the biopsies from patients with systemic sclerosis identical changes of thickening, clumping and fragmentation of the elastic fibres were observed. Quantitative assessment of the dermal elastic fibres using microdensitometry and video image analysis showed no significant difference between the patients and controls. On electron microscopy more advanced abnormalities similar to those seen in actinic damage and chronological aging were found in the biopsies from all the patients with systemic sclerosis compared to the controls.
Cellular, enzymatic, and genetic factors in the pathogenesis of abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Department of Surgery, Charing Cross &amp; Westminster Medical School, London, England.
Aneurysms of the abdominal aorta occur with atherosclerosis or connective tissue disorders. Changes of three components of aortic media, smooth muscle cells, elastin, and collagen, which could contribute to medial weakening, are discussed. Smooth muscle cells cultured from the aging abdominal aorta (normal, atherosclerotic, or aneurysmal) have limited replicative potential at five to six cell doublings, whereas cells from aneurysmal thoracic aorta undergo more than 20 cell doublings in culture. The elastin content is much reduced in aneurysms and this is associated with an increase in elastase activity of medial homogenates to 17.8 U/ng of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) compared with 8.3 and 4.4 U/ng of DNA in atherosclerotic and normal aorta, respectively. An elastinolytic enzyme has been purified from aneurysmal aorta and appears to have different properties from human leukocyte elastase. Ruptured aneurysms are associated with an increased total collagenase activity but the increase could be stimulated by, or result from, an influx of inflammatory cells and does not necessarily have a causal significance. In patients with a family history of aneurysm there appears to be a decreased content of type III collagen in aortic media: 24% +/- 4% compared with 32% +/- 5% in most aneurysms. Familial aneurysms are most common in women, and preliminary results suggest that a polymorphic variant of the type III collagen gene, defined by restriction enzyme digest, may be associated with aneurysmal disease in women. The genetic approach may define causal mechanisms predisposing patients to aneurysmal dilatation.
In vitro 4 MHz NMR proton relaxation times and in vitro mechanical behavior at low extension of human common carotid arterial wall.
We investigated the influence of the biomechanical behavior of human common carotid arterial wall on the NMR proton relaxation times using a Bruker Minispec at 4 MHz. The study was limited to low extension in simple longitudinal elongation of the carotid wall (the maximum loading stretch ratio being 40%). Twenty-five carotid samples divided into 2 longitudinal strips were tested. The first strip was used to determine the nondimensional elastic parameter alpha according to the mechanical model of Fung. The second strip was used to measure the proton relaxation times. T1 value was 316.8 ms +/- 27.6 and T2 value was 59.9 ms +/- 6.8. A significant linear correlation was found between T1 and Ln alpha (p = 0.02). T1 and T2 were not correlated to the age but linearly correlated to the tissue water content (p less than 0.0001), however the age and alpha were not correlated to the tissue water content. These results may reflect the differences in the amount of water binding sites of the elastin which is involved in the elasticity of the carotid wall at low extension.
Aged, 80 and over
Aging, carotid artery distensibility, and the Ser422Gly elastin gene polymorphism in humans.
Department of Internal Medicine and INSERM U337, Hôpital Broussais, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France.
Elastin is a protein of the extracellular matrix that forms the major component of elastic fibers from the arterial wall thickness and plays an important role in elastic properties of large blood vessels. To study the relationships between the Ser422Gly polymorphism in exon 16 of the gene-encoding elastin and the distensibility of 2 different arteries, the radial artery (a muscular artery) and the common carotid artery (an elastic artery), we studied a cohort of 320 subjects (49+/-12 years of age) without evidence of cardiovascular disease and who had never been treated with cardiovascular drugs. Distensibility and elastic modulus were evaluated for the common carotid and the radial arteries with high-resolution echo-tracking devices (NIUS-02 and Wall Track System). The A-to-G nucleotide change corresponding to the Ser422Gly amino acid change was studied by digestion of polymerase chain reaction products with BstNI. Results indicate that genotype frequencies (AA=10%, AG=51%, GG=39%) were in agreement with the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. For the carotid artery, a significant decrease in distensibility was observed in subjects carrying the A allele (with AA+AG genotypes) compared with subjects with the GG genotype (13.8+/-6.4 kPa(-1). 10(-3) versus 15.9+/-6.2 kPa(-1). 10(-3), P&lt;0.01), assuming a dominant effect of the A allele. Moreover, the presence of the A allele was associated with a significant increase in elastic modulus (0.98+/-0.40 kPa. 10(3) in subjects with AA+AG genotypes versus 0.83+/-0.41 kPa. 10(3) in subjects with GG genotypes, P&lt;0.01). Multivariate analysis indicated that these results were observed after adjustment for age, gender, and mean arterial blood pressure (P&lt;0.01). In contrast, no association was found between arterial parameters and genotypes for the radial artery. The 2-way analysis of covariance adjusted for mean arterial blood pressure indicated that the association between the A allele and distensibility of the carotid artery was observed only in subjects &gt;50 years of age, assuming for carotid distensibility a significant age effect (P&lt;0.01), genotype effect (P=0.01), and age-genotype interaction (P=0.04). The present results indicate a relationship between the Ser422Gly polymorphism and the distensibility of elastic arteries but not of muscular arteries and suggest that there is an age-genotype interaction for carotid artery distensibility.
The spontaneous rupture of the internal elastic lamina (IEL) in various arteries occurs to different extents in different rat strains. We have quantified this phenomenon in the caudal and renal arteries and abdominal aorta in two normotensive inbred strains: the Brown Norway (BN) and Long Evans (LE) strains. At 5 weeks of age, BN rats of both sexes exhibited small numbers of interruptions in the IEL of the caudal artery, whereas LE rats did not. Postpubertal male and female BN rats presented large numbers of IEL interruptions in the caudal artery and significant numbers in the renal artery and abdominal aorta, whereas LE rats showed few in the caudal artery and none in the other arteries. Treatment with beta-aminopropionitrile (BAPN, an inhibitor of lysyl oxidase, the enzyme involved in the formation of cross-links in elastin and collagen) increased the formation of IEL ruptures in both strains in the caudal and renal artery and in the abdominal aorta in BN rats, but not in the abdominal aorta of LE rats. Apart from IEL ruptures, which were more prevalent in BN rats, no differences were observed in the ultrastructure of the aortic elastic fibers between the two strains, either in controls or in BAPN-treated rats. When male rats of both strains were made hypertensive by unilateral nephrectomy and administration of deoxycorticosterone and salt, mortality was more precocious in the BN strain although blood pressure was significantly higher in the BN strain at only one time point. The incidence of cerebrovascular hemorrhage was 48% in BN rats and 0% in LE rats. Hypertension increased the formation of ruptures in the IEL in some arteries - to a greater extent in the BN than in the LE rats. These results raise the possibility that the propensity to spontaneous rupture of the IEL, which is in part genetically determined, may reflect a latent form of vascular fragility which becomes significant in hypertension, resulting in poor survival and susceptibility to cerebrovascular accidents.
Correlations between age and rat dermis modifications. Ultrastructural-morphometric evaluations and lysyl oxidase activity.
The extracellular matrix is a complex, integrated macromolecular system which plays a crucial role in the economy of each organ. In this study we focused our attention on the correlations between age and rat skin dermis. The latter was chosen as a model of the connective tissue, and was analyzed by means of electron microscopy and by measurement of the activity of lysyl oxidase, the enzyme involved in collagen and elastin crosslink formation. Ultrastructural and morphometric evaluations associated to body weight growth, showed a progressive increase in the amounts of extracellular components and a progressive reduction in the cell density. Skin from adult animals appeared characterized by a well organized matrix; by contrast, in old rats, we observed several degenerative features such as the disorganization of collagen bundles, the vacuolization of elastic fibers, and the atrophy of the mesenchimal cells. Morphometric evaluations in old animals showed a slight but significant reduction in the percentage of the total collagen measured, a fair stability in the area occupied by the elastin fibers, and an increase of the apparently non-structured matrix. The fact that lysyl oxidase activity was diminished in old rats does not corroborate the observation by several authors that increased collagen insolubility is a consequence of higher intra- and intermolecular crosslinking. This would suggest that other chemical modifications, such as crosslink oxidation or non enzymatic glycosylation, might be involved during the aging of connective tissue. The qualitative and quantitative modifications observed at all ages illustrate the correlation between connective tissue modifications and structural and/or functional properties of the skin.
Wavelength dependence of histological, physical, and visible changes in chronically UV-irradiated hairless mouse skin.
Albino hairless mice (Skh: HR-1) exposed chronically to sub-erythemal doses of UV radiation display physical, visible and histological alterations. Using narrow bandwidth radiation covering the UV radiation spectrum from 280-380 nm, the wavelength dependence of these alterations was determined. The wavelength dependence spectra indicate that for all but one parameter measured (skin sagging), UV-B radiation is considerably more efficient than UV-A radiation in producing changes in the skin. However, in natural sunlight there is considerably more UV-A than UV-B radiation, providing the potential for UV-A to have a larger contribution to skin damage than UV-B. This argues in favor of using broad spectrum photoprotective agents to shield the skin adequately from UV-induced aging. The spectra were also used to develop potential associations among events by determining which events occur at similar wavelengths. There seems to be a correspondence between mouse visible skin wrinking (UV-B event) and two histological events: increase in glycosaminoglycans and alteration in collagen. There was no obvious correspondence among UV-A-induced events.
[Tensibility measurements on the rat's aorta III. Analysis of longitudinal and transversal extension as related to age (authors transl)].
Stress-strain diagrams of standardizised longitudinal and transversal stripes of the thoracic aorta of 125 male Sprague-Dawley rats aged 9, 15, 24 and 30 months were recorded by an electromechanical instrument. The stripes were subjected to three successive extension-relaxation cycles. The relaxation curves of the third cycle were approximated to the functions y = a + bx and y = cxd (longitudinal stripes) and y = mxf and y = gxh (transversal stripes) respectively. The parameters could be interpreted as measures for structural and functional properties of elastic and collagenous fibers. The age changes of the curve parameters led to the following conclusions concerning age-dependent functional alterations of the aorta: The emphasis can be placed upon the increasing resistance counteracting the extension occuring with great stroke volumes. This may lead to the reduction of the capacity of the air chamber with great stroke volumes. These phenomena seem to be mainly caused by an increase of the pitch of the spiral of the collagenic fiber and the increase of the amount and/or the stability of the collagen. Age-related alterations of the elastin and of the net structure formed by the fibers influence also the distensibility at smaller extensions but seem to be less important. Therefore, the structural alterations of the aorta with age will affect the function in the first place at large stroke volumes and not be very obvious at a basic heart performance.
Connective tissue biochemistry of the aging dermis. Age-associated alterations in collagen and elastin.
Cutaneous aging represents a complex situation in which at least two independent factors--innate aging and solar exposure--contribute to the development of degenerative changes in the dermis. The biochemical and ultrastructural evidence reviewed in this article indicates that reduced collagen deposition, as a result of diminished collagen biosynthesis and reduced proliferative capacity of the fibroblasts, could explain the development of dermal atrophy and would relate to poor wound healing in the elderly. At the same time, perturbations in the supramolecular organization of the elastic fiber network lead to alterations in the mechanical properties of the skin, as manifested by loose and sagging skin with reduced resilience and elasticity.
Despite an overall thinning of the epidermis and focal areas of cytologic atypia, there was no morphologic evidence that the protective function of this tissue was compromised by age. The characteristic morphologic markers associated with the keratinization process were not altered either in appearance or in amounts. A well-formed stratum corneum was present, suggestive that barrier ability is not compromised in senile skin. Whereas alterations in the aged epidermis are slight, the dermal-epidermal changes are marked and have greater physiologic consequences. The major change is a relatively flat dermal-epidermal junction because of retraction of the epidermal papillae as well as the microprojections of basal cells into the dermis. This flattening results in a more fragile tissue that is less resistant to shearing forces. Retraction of the epidermal downgrowths may also explain the loss in proliferative capacity associated with the aged epidermis. The major alterations in the aged dermis concern the architecture of the collagen and elastin networks. Both fibrous components appear more compact because of a decrease in the voids or spaces between the fibers; the spaces resulted from a loss of ground substance. Collagen bundles appear to unravel, and the individual elastic fibers show signs of elastolysis. The net effect of these fibrous rearrangements and alterations is a dermis that is less stretchable, less resilient, more lax, and prone to wrinkling.
Hernandez MR
By using immunofluorescent staining we were able to characterize the age-related changes in the macromolecules making up the extracellular matrix of the lamina cribrosa of the human optic nerve head. As the cores of the cribriform plates enlarged with age, there were age-related increases in the apparent density of collagen types I and III and elastin that constituted the connective tissue support of the nerve bundles. Collagen type IV coated the cribriform plates as basement membranes and was also present within the cores as a fine filamentous network, which increased in density with age as the cribriform plates expanded. As this tissue ages, individual differences leading to more or less of a particular macromolecule of the extracellular matrix may alter the support function of the lamina cribrosa and influence the degeneration of the optic nerve associated with glaucoma.
Clinically detectable, age-associated cutaneous changes result from two independent processes: chronologic aging and actinic irradiation. Several lines of evidence suggest that these two processes have different biologic, biochemical, and molecular mechanisms. This review summarizes the current understanding of age-associated alterations in the biochemistry and molecular biology of the extracellular matrix.
Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Auckland, New Zealand.
The intimal thickness of the coronary arteries of humans less than 20 years of age was compared with that 9 other species. It was found that humans were unique amongst the species studied in showing substantial intimal thickening at an early age. The intimal thickening was associated with defects of the internal elastic lamina (IEL), which in humans were not repaired, but which in other species were associated with an effective reduplication of the IEL. This reformed IEL appeared in other species to form a significant obstruction to the diffusion of macromolecules from the lumen into the arterial wall, but did not do so in humans. Preliminary observations also indicated that the endothelial cells were closely associated with a well-formed elastin membrane in other species, and formed a continuous inner lining for the arterial wall. In human coronary arteries with substantial intimal thickening, the endothelium was incomplete, with many bare areas.
Structure of the elastin gene and alternative splicing of elastin mRNA: implications for human disease.
Department of Anatomy and Histology, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104.
The protein elastin is largely responsible for the elastic properties of vertebrate lungs, large blood vessels, and skin. The structure of the human, bovine, and chick elastin gene and protein monomer, tropoelastin, has recently been elucidated by using techniques of molecular biology. Extensive homology of amino acid sequence exists among the mammalian species and there is in addition strong conservation of nucleotide sequences in the 3' untranslated region of the gene. The translated exons are small and embedded in large expanses of introns. Sequences coding for the hydrophobic regions, responsible for the elastic properties of the molecule, and the alanine-lysine rich regions, responsible for crosslink formation between molecules, reside in separate exons and alternate for the most part in the elastin gene. S1 analyses and sequence analysis of cDNA and genomic clones have indicated that there is substantial alternative splicing of the primary elastin transcript. Variations in the structure of mRNAs resulting from alternative splicing could explain the existence of the multiple forms of tropoelastin observed electrophoretically in several species. Different kinds of splicing patterns could occur in human populations and may contribute to aging and pathological situations in the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems.
[Elastin and elastases. Past, present, and future].
Extracellular matrix (ECM) is composed of a large number of macromolecules belonging to one of the four classes comprising ECM, collagens and elastin, the fibrous elements, proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans and structural glycoproteins. Three of these 4 classes emerged during the Cambrian explosion, at the level of the first invertebrates, the sponges. Elastin appeared only in vertebrates. This protein is also the first to undergo post-synthetic modifications responsible for the progressive loss of its essential rheological properties involved in its physiological functions in the circulatory and respiratory system of vertebrates. The essential mechanisms of its emergence and decay are sufficiently understood in order to integrate them in the processes of development and age-dependent decay of organisms.
Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Interactions
[Maturation and aging of elastic fibers].
We give a review of the maturation and aging processes of elastic fibers. Elastic fibers of adult human skin are composed of elastin (amorphous matrix) and surrounded by microfibrils (structural glycoproteins). The physiological aging of elastic fibers is a continuous process starting at the age of 40 or 50 and reaching its final state in the senium. This process is characterized by the following morphological changes: (1) decreasing number of microfibrils, (2) occurrence of osmiophilic inclusions, and (3) fragmentation and disintegration of the fibers. These alterations are due to reduced synthesis of elastin and increased deposits of lipids and calcium. As a result, the elastic fibres show increased susceptibility towards proteolytic enzymes.
Adaptations of carotid arteries of young and mature rabbits to reduced carotid blood flow.
Adaptive responses of rabbit common carotid arteries were examined after 70-80% reductions in blood flow produced by ipsilateral external carotid artery ligation. These flow reductions elicited growth inhibition of arterial wall tissue in immature rabbits. Specifically, experimental carotid arteries exhibited DNA levels significantly lower, by 35%, than contralateral control arteries 1 mo after external carotid ligation. Lower elastin contents (38%) were also observed, although collagen contents were not affected. These changes were accompanied by a relative reduction in wall mass of 30% and a 31% reduction in internal diameter. Adult rabbits exhibited decreased internal diameter (21%) after flow reduction, but no significant change in vessel mass or wall constituents was observed. Early diameter reductions were vasoconstrictor in origin, but the vessel functioned as a smaller artery rather than as a partially constricted normal vessel after 1 mo, i.e., both maximally dilated and maximally constricted diameters were reduced. A reduction in endothelial cell number was detected for the narrowed vessels. Manipulation of local flow conditions indicated that the vessels responded to changes in mean blood flow rather than the pulsatile component of flow.
Skin aging: lessons from cutis laxa and elastoderma.
Several lines of evidence suggest that elastic fibers provide resilience to normal human skin, and that abnormalities in elastin may be the primary event leading to the clinical appearance of aged skin. Innately aged skin exhibits a paucity and fragmentation of elastic fibers, while actinically damaged skin consists of an abnormal accumulation of elastotic material within the dermis. Cutis laxa and elastoderma are two cutaneous diseases that manifest as selective alterations in elastic fibers. Clinical and histopathologic findings in these diseases are similar to those found in cutaneous aging. Thus, it appears that alterations in the quantity and/or quality of the elastic fibers may contribute to age-associated cutaneous changes.
Changes in collagen cross-linking and lysyl oxidase by estrogen.
Dermal collagen solubility and lysyl oxidase activity of bones were measured in DDD mice of advancing age. Insoluble fractions of the dermal collagen increased more rapidly in females than in males after 5 weeks of age. Activity of the lysyl oxidase extracted from bones was higher in females than in males after 4 weeks of age. After sexual maturation, such sex differences were always observed in skin as well as in bone tissue. In other experimental animals, dermal collagen solubility was markedly decreased by estrogen treatment and lysyl oxidase was remarkably activated by estrogen in both skin and bone. Thus it is clear that estrogen stimulates the enzyme activity and accelerates the maturation of collagen and elastin in extracellular space.
Bone and Bones/drug effects
The near total mineral-free and elastin-free cartilage content of a three-month-old mongrel dog was 0.73% of the dry body weight. Extraarticular (costal, tracheobronchial, thyroid, cricoid, nasal septum) cartilage constituted 0.44%; articular, 0.06; intervertebral disc, 0.10; elastic, 0.12 and meniscal fibrocartilage, 0.01%. Articular tissue accounted for only 7.25% of the total cartilage uronic acid. This is the first estimate of the amount and distribution of cartilage in a vertebrate species.
Structural proteins of the neonatal and adult lamina cribrosa.
Optic nerve heads from three premature infants and six adults were studied immunohistochemically to compare the extracellular proteins in the lamina cribrosa of young and old human eyes. In both age groups, antibodies to the basement membrane components laminin and collagen type IV were associated with blood vessels and laminar beam margins. In the adult eyes, interstitial collagen types I and III were heavily distributed within the laminar beams. Antibodies to fibrillin, the microfibrillar portion of elastin, labeled discrete, heavy bands oriented longitudinally within these beams. The beams of the neonatal lamina cribrosa contained much less interstitial collagen, with a predominance of collagen type III. Neonatal elastic tissue bands were less numerous and distinct within the laminar beams. These biochemical differences between the young and old lamina cribrosa may, in part, explain different clinical behaviors of the optic nerve head in congenital and adult glaucoma.
Mutant beige mice and normal C57 black mice were given endotoxin intratracheally (IT) once a week for 10 weeks. The objective was to establish whether repeated recruitment of neutrophils to the lung, at levels that induced lung injury to normal mice, would be ineffective in producing lung lesions in neutrophil elastase-deficient beige mice. Endotoxin (25 mg) given IT causes a rapid influx of neutrophils into the lungs of both the C57 black and beige mice, reaching a maximum after 18 h and remaining elevated for at least another 30 h. After 10 weeks of endotoxin instillation the normal C57 black mouse lungs showed evidence of lung injury. There were histological signs of alveolar wall damage, and the mean linear intercepts (Lm) were increased 30% in the endotoxin-treated group. The specific compliance of the lungs from the endotoxin-treated mice was slightly increased. Beige mice, on the other hand, showed no histological or morphological evidence that the neutrophil influx produced lung injury. There was, however, a notable difference in the histological appearance of the control beige lungs compared to control C57 blacks. Beige lungs appeared normal at birth but apparently do not undergo normal alveolarization during neonatal development. Adult lungs have fewer alveoli with smooth terminal air ducts lacking the normal complement of alveolar struts. There was not indication of copper deficiency or problems in elastin synthesis or structure in the beige mice. The results of these studies support a preeminent role for elastase in neutrophil-induced lung lesions.
Isolation and characterization of human elastin cDNAs, and age-associated variation in elastin gene expression in cultured skin fibroblasts.
In attempts to isolate human elastin cDNAs, a human placental lambda gt11 cDNA library was screened with a 1.3 kilobase sheep genomic DNA subclone, corresponding to the 3'-end of the elastin mRNA. The four largest clones, the largest being approximately 3 kilobase, were characterized by Northern transfer analyses, restriction endonuclease digestions and dideoxy nucleotide sequencing. Northern transfer analyses of poly(A)+RNA revealed hybridization to mRNA transcripts in the region of 3.5 kilobase. Restriction endonuclease mapping and nucleotide sequencing demonstrated distinct domains characteristic of elastin, and identified areas of variability which apparently reflects alternative splicing of the primary elastin transcripts. To demonstrate the utilization of these cDNAs for studies on elastin gene expression in human cells, elastin mRNA was examined in fibroblast cultures established from the skin of several individuals of varying ages. Northern transfer analyses and slot blot hybridizations demonstrated that elastin gene expression is initiated early during fetal development, and continues at a relatively constant level through several decades. The lowest abundance of elastin mRNA was noted in the cell cultures established for the oldest individual studied (61-year-old female). Demonstration of elastin gene expression in cultured fibroblasts provides a system to study diseases affecting the elastic fibers.
The effects of hypertension and its treatment on the function and structure of arteries have been extensively studied, but no data are yet available on the effect of hypotensive drugs on the large arteries in normotensive rats. Two groups of 11-month-old normotensive breeder male rats were treated for 5 months, one with an angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (MK-421, 2 mg/kg per day; n = 10) and the other with dihydralazine (15 mg/kg per day; n = 8). A group of 14 rats served as controls. Blood pressure was recorded every 14 days by the tail-cuff method. At the end of the treatment period (5 months), the rats were killed under anaesthesia and the descending thoracic aorta was removed and fixed. The different components of the aorta were assessed by automated morphometric image analysis after specific coloration of elastin (orceine), collagen (sirius red) and nuclei (haematoxylin after periodic acid oxidation. Both the ACE inhibitor and dihydralazine caused similar decreases in systolic blood pressure (SBP) compared with controls. This hypotensive effect was associated with a reduction in medial thickness, from 120 +/- 15 microns in controls to 104 +/- 9 microns in ACE inhibitor-treated and 103 +/- 10 microns in dihydralazine-treated normotensive rats. Elastin density significantly increased in the two treatment groups but the greatest increase was in the dihydralazine-treated group (P less than 0.001). Elastin fibre thickness increased significantly in the dihydralazine-treated group only. Collagen density was not significantly modified by either treatment.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Age-related differences in norepinephrine and non-collagenous protein in human vas deferens.
The existence of norepinephrine or non-collagenous protein in some tissues is believed to reflect the sympathetic discharge of the structures and plays an important role in contractile ability. Specimens of vas deferens were obtained from 44 subjects in various decades of life from age 20 to 84, and levels of norepinephrine, non-collagenous protein, collagen and elastin were determined. The level of norepinephrine and non-collagenous protein declined with increasing age. Both parameters inversely correlated with age. Collagen and elastin increased with advancing age. The regression line and coefficient of correlation between both variables showed significantly positive correlations. It is suggested that the contractile ability of human vas deferens, as defined by norepinephrine and non-collagenous protein contents, decreases with age, and the age-related increase in collagen and elastin may be of importance in reducing the contractile capability of this structure.
Aged, 80 and over
Elastin is the main protein of elastic fibers and confers the property of elastic recoil to the tissues such as arteries, lung, elastic cartilage,... Elastin synthesis goes through several steps: gene transcription, alternative splicing of pre-mRNA, mRNA translation, hydroxylation of some proline residues of the newly synthesized protein-tropoelastin-, association of with a 67 kDa chaperone protein, secretion of tropoelastin molecules in the extracellular space, and their deposition on the microfibrillar scaffold which contains fibrillin 1, fibrillin 2, MAGP 1 and MAGP 2,.... After the synthesis of cross-links-lysinonorleucine, desmosine, isodesmosine-, elastin becomes insoluble and elastic. The elastogenic pathway is regulated at many levels. The most recently described regulatory mechanism of elastin synthesis is the control of elastin mRNA stability. Elastogenesis is well controlled during development and aging but remains responsive to external factors such as soluble compounds-cytokines, vitamins, hormones,...- and hemodynamic stress. In order to ensure its function, both quantity and quality of elastin should be and should remain optimal in elastic tissues.
Glucocorticoids have been shown by others to increase the synthesis of elastin both in aortic tissue of embryo chicks and in cells derived from fetal ligamentum nuchae. This report describes the effects of hydrocortisone on the production of elastin in aortic tissue of developing chick embryos and chicks. While the effect of hydrocortisone on elastin synthesis is stimulatory in the 14 day chick embryo and the day-old chick, the same dose of this glucocorticoid has no effect on elastin production in the 7 day old chick and significantly inhibits synthesis of elastin in the 14 day old chick. These age-related alterations in elastin production in response to hydrocortisone cannot be attributed to an effect of the steroid on the pool size of the radioactively labelled amino acid used to measure elastin synthesis.
Elastase, collagenase, and cathepsin D activities in the aortas of spontaneously hypertensive and renal hypertensive rats.
In an attempt to clarify the roles of proteases in the developmental mechanisms of hypertensive vascular lesions, changes in activities of aortic elastase, collagenase, and cathepsin D in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and renal hypertensive rats were biochemically investigated. In SHR, elastase activity initially showed a significant increase, once two-fold higher than that in the control; but the activity tended to decrease earlier than that in the control. In both SHR and normotensive control rats collagenase activities tended to increase with advancing age. The activity in SHR was two-fold higher than that in the control at all ages examined. In both younger SHR and normotensive rats cathepsin D activities proved to be increased with advancing age, while in old rats the activities tended to decrease. The activity in SHR was three- to fivefold higher than that in the control at all ages examined. In renal hypertensive rats, the activities of elastase, collagenase, and cathepsin D increased gradually with increasing blood pressure, at levels significantly higher than those in the control. These findings suggest that the metabolisms of proteins such as elastin and collagen, expressed by these enzyme activities, are accelerated under hypertensive conditions.
Elastin in the most resistant fibrous protein of the organisms. Its degradation is catalysed by proteases designated as elastases. Elastic fibers appeared during phylogenesis at the level of the first Vertebrates and rendered possible the emergence of efficient circulatory and respiratory systems which were necessary for the development of the higher Vertebrates. Several pathological conditions, mostly age-dependent, are accompanied by the degradation of elastic fibers or their alteration due to increasing association with lipids and calcium salts. Several proteases (endopeptidases) of cellular origin were described over the last years, especially those of PMN leukocytes, platelets, monocytes-macrophages, smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts. Although less active on fibrous elastin than pancreatic elastase, these enzymes may well play an important role in the development of age-dependent pathologies such as athero-arteriosclerosis and emphysema. The involvement of cellular elastases in these pathologies is discussed in some detail. The age-dependent increase, both in vivo and in vitro of the elastase activity of fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells appears to play an important role in the modifications of cell behaviour observed in the above pathologies.
Entropic elastic processes in protein mechanisms. II. Simple (passive) and coupled (active) development of elastic forces.
The first part of this review on entropic elastic processes in protein mechanisms (Urry, 1988) demonstrated with the polypentapeptide of elastin (Val1-Pro2-Gly3-Val4-Gly5)n that elastic structure develops as the result of an inverse temperature transition and that entropic elasticity is due to internal chain dynamics in a regular nonrandom structure. This demonstration is contrary to the pervasive perspective of entropic protein elasticity of the past three decades wherein a network of random chains has been considered the necessary structural consequence of the occurrence of dominantly entropic elastomeric force. That this is not the case provides a new opportunity for understanding the occurrence and role of entropic elastic processes in protein mechanisms. Entropic elastic processes are considered in two classes: passive and active. The development of elastomeric force on deformation is class I (passive) and the development of elastomeric force as the result of a chemical process shifting the temperature of a transition is class II (active). Examples of class I are elastin, the elastic filament of muscle, elastic force changes in enzyme catalysis resulting from binding processes and resulting in the straining of a scissile bond, and in the turning on and off of channels due to changes in transmembrane potential. Demonstration of the consequences of elastomeric force developing as the result of an inverse temperature transition are seen in elastin, where elastic recoil is lost on oxidation, i.e., on decreasing the hydrophobicity of the chain and shifting the temperature for the development of elastomeric force to temperatures greater than physiological. This is relevant in general to loss of elasticity on aging and more specifically to the development of pulmonary emphysema. Since random chain networks are not the products of inverse temperature transitions and the temperature at which an inverse temperature transition occurs depends on the hydrophobicity of the polypeptide chain, it now becomes possible to consider chemical processes for turning elastomeric force on and off by reversibly changing the hydrophobicity of the polypeptide chain. This is herein called mechanochemical coupling of the first kind; this is the chemical modulation of the temperature for the transition from a less-ordered less elastic state to a more-ordered more elastic state. In the usual considerations to date, development of elastomeric force is the result of a standard transition from a more-ordered less elastic state to a less-ordered more elastic state.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
Effect of elastin peptides on ion fluxes in mononuclear cells, fibroblasts, and smooth muscle cells.
Elastin peptides prepared by alcoholic potassium hydroxide degradation of highly purified fibrous elastin from bovine ligamentum nuchae (kappa-elastin) were shown to act on the ion channels of human monocytes, aorta smooth muscle cells, and skin fibroblasts. In small amounts (between 0.1 and 1 microgram/ml), elastin peptides strongly increased calcium influx and inhibited calcium efflux by an apparently calmodulin-dependent mechanism. They also were shown to increase sodium influx and to decrease rubidium influx in monocyte preparations obtained from human blood. Only the ouabain-sensitive portion of rubidium influx was inhibited. The action of elastin peptides is strongly concentration-dependent; the maximal activity observed in the above reactions was less than 1 microgram/ml. These results suggest that elastin peptides may play a role in the regulation of the biological activity of mesenchymal cells, in the proximity of which they are released by the action of elastase-type enzymes. Such enzymes were demonstrated in aorta smooth muscle cells (membrane-bound serine protease) and in fibroblasts (metalloprotease). Monocytes and polymorphonuclear leukocytes were also shown to carry elastase-type enzymes. The release of peptides from elastin by elastase-type enzymes and the action of such peptides on the ion fluxes through the cell membrane may well be involved in mechanisms of the modulation of the phenotype of mesenchymal cells during aging as well as in the development of age-dependent pathologies such as arterioclerosis.
Post-embedding methods for immunolocalization of elastin and related components in tissues.
Elastic tissue is composed of amorphous-appearing elastin and 12-nm diameter microfibrils, one component of which has recently been isolated and characterized as the 31 KD microfibril-associated glycoprotein MAGP. Monospecific antibodies to each of these components have been developed in this laboratory. The parameters that determine optimal localization of colloidal gold probes for post-embedding immunolabeling of elastic tissue components have been systematically studied in a variety of normal and developing tissues in mammals and birds. Protein A-gold probes stabilized with dextran have been shown to provide complexes that remain stable after more than 2 years. Conditions have been defined that permit precise localization within the extracellular matrix of antibodies to MAGP and to elastin, singly and together. Best results were obtained with acrylic resins (Lowicryl K4M or LR White). Fixation in glutaraldehyde or other aldehydic fixatives, with or without osmium, did not affect the immunostaining of elastic tissue with affinity-purified antibodies to tropoelastin, or to anti-[alpha-elastin] or anti-[alkali-insoluble elastin]. Immunostaining with the anti-MAGP antibody was less robust and was possible in tissues which had been fixed only lightly before embedding in Lowicryl K4M or LR White. This staining was enhanced by metaperiodate oxidation of the sections as well as by reduction of the tissues with sodium borohydride en bloc, followed by hyaluronidase digestion of the sections. The effects on immunostaining of a range of enzyme digestions have also been examined. Conditions have thus been defined that make possible detailed study of the relationship between elastic tissue, elastin-associated microfibrils, and other microfibrillar structures in normal and abnormal tissues during development and aging.
The character and essence of changes taking place in the connective tissue matrix of the vascular wall under the effect of thymus deficiency are not well enough clarified. The aim of the study was to assess the content of collagen, elastin, total glucosamines, total glycoproteins, total nonfibrillar protein and total protein in the aorta total glycoproteins, total nonfibrillar protein and total protein in the aorta of adult thymectomized rats of the Wistar strain and in control animals over a 12-month post-thymectomy period. The amount of collagen and elastin augments both in connection with the aging process (after 2-4 months), and as a result of thymectomy. Glycoproteins show an increase starting from the third month in the controls, and from the fifth month in thymectomized animals. Glucosamines display a fluctuating decrease parallel to aging in either of the groups under study. The content of total protein and nonfibrillar protein reveals no differences worthy of notice. It is reasonable to assume the existence of a correlation between thymus activity and metabolism of the connective tissue components in the vascular wall of rats.
Thymus Gland/physiology*
Comparison of arterial wall properties in young and old racing greyhounds.
Arteries were obtained from several sites in young (YGH) and old racing greyhounds (OGH). Segments were used for the determination of arterial wall mechanics under conditions of active (norepinephrine) and passive (Ca2+ free and 2 mM EGTA) smooth muscle. Contiguous segments were used for the chemical analysis of connective tissue, water and electrolyte content. The passive stiffness of arteries from OGH was consistently greater than that of the YGH. Collagen content and the collagen-elastin ratio were larger at all sites in the OGH. However, the connective tissue changes were not considered to be of sufficient magnitude to explain the changes in passive mechanics. Maximum values of active stress development were generally lower in arteries from the OGH as was their relative cell content. Active stress development normalized to smooth muscle cell cross-section was not uniformly changed in arteries from OGH. In spite of the lower active stress development in some arteries, the ability of smooth muscle to constrict lumen diameter was not different between OGH and YGH at transmural pressures in the physiological range. While a number of changes occur in arteries of purebred greyhounds with aging, they appear to occur in such a fashion that normal function is not grossly altered.
Correlation of pulmonary arterial smooth muscle structure and reactivity during adaptation to extrauterine life.
Unit of Vascular Biology and Pharmacology, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
Peripheral pulmonary arteries remodel immediately after birth as pulmonary vascular resistance falls. We hypothesised that there is a link between the response to agonist stimulation and wall structure in early postnatal life. Arteries from fetal, newborn and 14-day-old piglets were mounted on a perfusion myograph. Lumen diameter and smooth muscle cell nuclear positions were recorded after sequential addition of KCl, U46619 and bradykinin. Subsequently, vessels were studied by confocal and transmission electron microscopy. Contractile agonist stimulation caused a greater and faster reduction in lumen diameter in the newborn than at 14 days (p &lt; 0.02) and the distance between cells decreased more in the newborn (p &lt; 0.05). Unstimulated smooth muscle cells changed shape from being rounded in the fetus to fusiform by 14 days, with increasing length/width ratio (p &lt; 0.01). On contraction, length/width ratio decreased most at 14 days (p &lt; 0.01). Extracellular matrix, collagen and elastin, sparse at birth, increased by 14 days. Thus a greater change in lumen diameter in relation to cellular contraction was observed in the newborn than at 14 days and the amount of extracellular matrix within the vessel wall may affect the overall change in lumen diameter.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
Aging of the extracellular matrix and its pathology.
Recent concepts on the mechanisms of aging of extracellular matrix (EM) are reviewed as well as its involvement in age-associated diseases. Cell differentiation, histogenesis and organogenesis can be analyzed in terms of the program of the biosynthesis of EM macromolecules during development, maturation and aging. The most important biological role of EM is the integration of cells in tissues, of tissues in organs and of organs in the whole organism. EM can directly influence cell behavior through the contact between EM and the genome mediated by structural glycoproteins (fibronectin, laminin, elastonectin, etc.) interacting with other EM macromolecules (collagen, proteoglycans, elastin) and the cytoskeleton by trans-membrane receptors (integrins). Most age-associated diseases exhibit a deviation (qualitative or quantitative) from the normal program of EM biosynthesis. Three examples are analyzed in some detail: atherosclerosis, diabetes and malignant tumors. The degradation of elastic fibers catalyzed by cellular elastase-type enzymes is observed in atherosclerosis and also in emphysema and skin aging. Several of these enzymes were isolated and characterized from platelets, fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells and lipoproteins. The biosynthesis of some of them increases with age and facilitates cell migration. Plasma fibronectin increases with age exponentially. This increase is absent or strongly attenuated in diabetes and some cancers. Tissue fibronectin increases in diabetes, Werner syndrome and in the peritumoral desmoplastic reaction while most tumor cells can no more retain fibronectin on their membrane facilitating their movement in the organism. These examples demonstrate the importance of the study of cell matrix interactions for gerontology.
[Aging, elastin and yellow pigments].
Tendon and ligament from the horse: an ultrastructural study of collagen fibrils and elastic fibres as a function of age.
Department of Radiology and Radiation Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins 80523.
Sequential necropsies and histologic evaluations of young adult beagle dogs were performed after irradiation of the thorax. Total doses to the heart were 36, 44, or 52 Gy given in 4-Gy fractions in 4 weeks. One month after irradiation there was little histologic evidence of damage visible by light microscopy. However, ventricular and septal weights were increased, probably due to edema. At 3 months damage to endothelial and mesothelial cells was evident. By 12 months the myocardium was thinned and focal degeneration and loss of muscle cells and Purkinje fibers were observed. There was extensive subendocardial and epicardial fibrosis as well as intimal proliferation in coronary arteries. Morphometric analyses were performed on the myocardium, pericardium, atria, and aorta. There was a slight increase in perivascular connective tissue in the myocardium. The pericardium was increased in thickness and the ratio of smooth muscle to elastin was decreased in the aorta. Severe fibrosis occurred only in the right atrium. At 1 year there was no clinical evidence of heart failure; however, evidence of myocardial damage was present histologically and functionally. Additional stress and continued aging are likely to enhance the damage and lead to serious complications. The interactions of irradiated lung and heart require further investigation.
The production of tropoelastin isoforms was examined by cell-free translation of nuchal ligament RNA from cows of various ages ranging from 110 days of gestation to adult. Tropoelastin polypeptides synthesized in vitro were immunoprecipitated with a specific monoclonal antibody and separated by high resolution sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. From these experiments three distinct tropoelastin isoform patterns were detected at different developmental periods. 1) The fetal period was characterized by three polypeptides of about 67, 65, and 63 kDa produced in a ratio of 1:3:2. 2) In neonatal tissue, the same molecular mass forms were detected; however, the relative isoform ratio changed to 2:3:1. 3) From adult ligament RNA, only the 67- and 65-kDa forms of tropoelastin were detected, and these were produced in equal amounts. The pattern of tropoelastin isoforms produced from RNA isolated from other fetal elastic tissues was the same as for fetal ligament. Additional studies demonstrated that the relative amount of functional tropoelastin mRNA correlated with steady state levels of mRNA consistent with transcriptional regulation of tropoelastin synthesis. Although the significance of developmental switching of individual tropoelastin isoforms is unknown, it is likely that this process is required for proper assembly and, thus, function of elastic tissue.
Detection of extracellular matrix molecules synthesized in vitro by monkey and human retinal pigment epithelium: influence of donor age and multiple passages.
The retinal pigment epithelium of various species, including man, can synthesize extracellular matrix components in vitro. We studied extracellular matrix molecule production by human, rhesus and cynomolgus monkey pigment epithelium in vitro, using a panel of specific antibodies to collagen types I-V, fibronectin, laminin, the basement membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycan, human alpha elastin, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and Factor VIII in a modified indirect immunofluorescence reaction. Results were similar between human and both monkey species in early passage cultures with respect to the positive detection of collagen types I, III, IV, V laminin, basement membrane proteoglycan, and fibronectin. The fluorescence was strongest in the center of confluent monolayers and was absent in border or isolated cells. Collagen type II, elastin, GFAP, or Factor VIII were not detected. Based on these findings, human and monkey pigment epithelium in vitro should be useful for the study of the synthesis, deposition and supramolecular interactions of a variety of extracellular matrix molecules.
Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee.
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria is a unique, rare disease with markedly accelerated aging. The average lifespan of affected individuals is 12 years. Although the biochemical basis of the syndrome is unknown, its influence appears to be primarily upon mesodermal tissues. Characteristics such as the altered appearance of the skin and the extensive and fatal involvement of the cardiovascular system led us to study elastin production in cultured skin fibroblasts from three progeroid individuals. We found tropoelastin production by progeroid cells was elevated six- to nine-fold at the protein and mRNA levels, while relative collagen synthesis was similar to control strains. There was little difference between progeroid and normal cells in expression of total protein or in total cellular mRNA content. Western blot analysis of tropoelastin from progeroid fibroblasts confirmed increased production of elastin but revealed no gross changes in the molecular mass. The significant increase in tropoelastin expression lends support to the concept that progeria results from a mesenchymal dysplasia, and offers a possible biochemical marker for the phenotype.
Collagen and elastin fibers in human pulmonary alveolar walls.
The morphology and morphometric data of collagen and elastin fibers in the pulmonary alveolar walls are presented. Specimens were obtained from postmortem lungs quick-frozen at specified transpulmonary pressures. Collagen was stained by silver, and elastin was stained by orcein. Photomicrographs were composed by computer. Young lungs typically show small collagen fibers that radiate from the "posts," whereas larger fiber bundles traverse the septum irrespective of capillary blood vessels. In older lungs, rings of collagen around the posts appear enlarged. Elastin bundles do not show obvious variation in pattern with age and inflation pressure. Statistical frequency distributions of the fiber width and curvature are both skewed, but the square root of the width and the cube root of the curvature have approximate normal distributions. Typically, for young lungs at transpulmonary pressure of 4 cmH2O, the mean of (width)1/2 (in micron1/2) for collagen fibers is 0.952 +/- 0.242 (SD), that of (curvature)1/3 (in micron-1/3) is 0.349 +/- 0.094. The corresponding values for elastin are 0.986 +/- 0.255 and 0.395 +/- 0.094.
Effect of elastin peptides and N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl phenylalanine on cytosolic free calcium in polymorphonuclear leukocytes of healthy middle-aged and elderly subjects.
The effect of elastin peptides (kappa-elastin, KE) and N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (FMLP) on cytosolic free calcium in polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNLs) of healthy middle-aged (35-45 years) and elderly (greater than 60 years) patients with normal and high serum cholesterol level was investigated. The cytosolic free calcium [( Ca2+]i) elevation after stimulation with these compounds was decreased in PMNLs of the aged groups compared to the healthy middle-aged group. The guanine nucleotide binding regulatory Gi protein inhibitor, pertussis toxin (PT) prevented the enhancing effect of KE and FMLP on PMNL free calcium of healthy middle-aged subjects, but could not completely abolish the [Ca2+]i elevation in PMNLs of aged subjects.
Growth hormone influences the content and composition of collagen in the aorta from old rats.
Collagen and elastin are major components of the aortic extracellular matrix and crucial in determining the stiffness of the aorta. We recently showed that growth hormone (GH) changes the mechanical properties, content and composition of aortic collagen from young rats. In the present study, the effect of GH on aorta from old rats was investigated. Old female rats (18(1/2)-20(1/2) months) were injected with either GH (5 mg/kg per day; n=15) or vehicle (n=14) for 80 days. Mechanical and biochemical properties of the thoracic aorta were investigated. Long-term GH injections increased the body weight of female rats by 47% accompanied by a threefold increase in serum IGF-I. The diameter of the aorta was increased by 5%, resulting in a 10% increase in the cross-section of the aortic lumen. Growth hormone increased the content of collagen per sample by 6% and increased the amount of type I collagen relative to type III collagen. No changes in the mechanical properties or elastin content per sample were found. In conclusion, GH induced a substantial growth of old rats. However, although the diameter and the collagen content were increased, the mechanical properties of the aorta were preserved in the GH-injected rats.
The elastic tissue of the skin. A comparison of spontaneous and actinic (solar) aging.
In order to separate the changes of actinic damage from those of simple aging, we studied the elastic fibers in low and high sun-exposed skins of normal subjects at different ages. Low sun-exposed skin shows chronologic aging lesions only. These begin at age 30 with a disappearance of oxytalan fibers and with some abnormalities in the reticular and deep dermis; at age 40, aging changes are established: no oxytalan fibers, marked abnormalities, and lysis of elaunic and elastic fibers. In high sun-exposed skin, age-related lesions also occur but are associated with more or less precocious elastotic degeneration in reticular and deep dermis. Both types of aging fibers are revealed by the antielastin antibody HB 8, disappear with elastase, but resist collagenase. Actinic elastosis clearly originates from elastin. The two types of change differ in electron microscopic appearance: with spontaneous aging, elastic fibers are disintegrated (loose and porous fibers); in actinic damage, elastotic fibers are thicker and have accentuated microfibril dense masses. The age-associated lesions could be due to the activity of protease of fibroblastic origin whereas the elastotic degeneration is probably due to the actinic stimulation of fibroblasts.
Fluorescence is a feature of elastin and collagen, both major compounds of human dermis that are altered by age and photoexposure. We studied the intrinsic fluorescence of skin in vivo in 28 human volunteers to determine whether photoaging and chronologic aging of the skin could be evaluated by this noninvasive technique. We demonstrate that the excitation of skin autofluorescence by laser ultraviolet radiation yields characteristic tissue fluorescence spectra that are unrelated to age, pigmentation, or skin thickness. The differences in skin autofluorescence appear to be related to photoexposure. Thus, laser-induced fluorimetry, a noninvasive technique, may be adaptable as a marker of photoaging.
Aging and the cardiovascular system.
As a result of aging, a variety of structural and biochemical changes occur in arterial walls that result in hemodynamic adaptations. With age, there is a thickening of intima and media, together with an increase in the number of smooth muscle cells, synthesis of collagen and elastin, and deposition of calcium, glycosaminoglycans, free and esterified cholesterol, and sphingolipids. These changes are similar to those observed in atherosclerosis, which is accompanied by marked increases of intimal smooth muscle cells and connective tissue constituents. The net effects of both aging and atherosclerosis are a loss of elasticity and distensibility. This results in a decrease in arterial compliance or capacitance, which in turn means that with increasing age systolic blood pressure (SBP) tends to be higher, and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) lower. As a consequence of structural changes both in myocardium and vessels, cardiac output and renal and hepatic blood flow undergo adaptive alterations in order to meet the requirements of central hemodynamics and peripheral circulation. The implications of these processes of aging demand appropriate treatment of cardiovascular disorders, in particular hypertension, which occurs in 30-50% of patients above the age of 60 years. Appropriate treatment may demand dose adjustment and careful selection of antihypertensive drugs with a minimum of side effects, which additionally are capable of diminishing preload and afterload.
The ciliary muscle ring contracts about 0.8 mm in radius during maximum accommodation and this change in radius does not significantly alter as the eye ages between 15 and 45 years. Despite this constant movement of the ciliary muscle ring, the force of contraction steadily increases over the same age period from 0.8 to 1.2 gms. The force of contraction of the ciliary muscle per dioptre--the myodioptre--changes both during the act of accommodation and as the eye ages. In the first case as the amplitude of accommodation increases, the myodioptre also increases in direct proportion to the amplitude. In the second case, as the eye ages an additional increase occurs at all amplitudes of accommodation. This increase is initially quite small but between the ages of 40 and 45 it becomes very much greater. As age advances this increased force of contraction is matched by a decrease in movement of the equator of the lens so that the zonule which is attached to both the ciliary body and the lens becomes increasingly stretched during accommodation and so can transmit the increased force of contraction. The zonular fibres between the ages of 15 and 45 do not appear to change in their extensile properties so the elasticity modulus remains constant with a value of 3.5 X 10(5)Nm-2. This Young's modulus is some 10 to 900 times less than the elasticity modulus respectively of lens capsule or tendon collagen but almost the same as aortic elastin.
Chromatographic studies of human lung elastin digestion products obtained by leucocyte elastase: comparison between newborn and adult soluble fragments.
Human insoluble elastin was prepared from newborn lungs and digested by leucocyte elastase. The soluble fragments were compared to those obtained from adult lung elastin in a previous work (Smyrlaki et al., 1986). Gel filtration on a Bio-Gel P-100 column of newborn elastin allowed the separation of fraction F1N (Mr's 30,000-10,000) which was eluted later than the excluded fraction F1A (Mr's 80,000-30,000) previously isolated from adult elastin. The difference in the sizes of the large peptide fragments originating from both elastins was also shown on SDS-PAGE. Reversed phase HPLC was performed on a C18 column using a multi-step gradient elution procedure. Different patterns were observed for the high (F1N) and the low (F2N) molecular size fragments of newborn elastin. The same peak distribution was obtained with adult elastin. Comparison of the amino acid compositions of the most retained peaks (3, 4 and 5), derived from fractions F1N and F1A, showed analogies for the contents of the major nonpolar amino acids and crosslinks. Thus, this procedure allowed the separation of typical fragments of elastin which might be released in vivo by leucocyte elastase during pulmonary diseases.
Despite an overall thinning of the epidermis and focal areas of cytologic atypia, there was no morphologic evidence that the protective function of this tissue was compromised by age. The characteristic morphologic markers associated with the keratinization process were not altered either in appearance or in amounts. A well-formed stratum corneum was present, suggestive that barrier ability is not compromised in senile skin. Whereas alterations in the aged epidermis are slight, the dermal-epidermal changes are marked and have greater physiologic consequences. The major change is a relatively flat dermal-epidermal junction because of retraction of the epidermal papillae as well as the microprojections of basal cells into the dermis. This flattening results in a more fragile tissue less resistant to shearing forces. Retraction of the epidermal downgrowths may also explain the loss in proliferative capacity associated with the aged epidermis. The major alterations in the aged dermis concern the architecture of the collagen and elastin networks. Both fibrous components appear more compact because of a decrease in the voids or spaces between the fibers; the spaces resulted from a loss of ground substance. Collagen bundles appear to unravel, and the individual elastic fibers show signs of elastolysis. The net effect of these fibrous rearrangements and alterations is a dermis that is less stretchable, less resilient, more lax, and prone to wrinkling.
Connective tissue biochemistry of the aging dermis. Age-related alterations in collagen and elastin.
Cutaneous aging represents a complex situation in which at least two independent factors--innate aging and solar exposure--contribute to the development of degenerative changes in the dermis. The biochemical and ultrastructural evidence reviewed in this article indicates that reduced collagen deposition, as a result of diminished collagen biosynthesis and reduced proliferative capacity of the fibroblasts, could explain the development of dermal atrophy and would relate to poor wound healing in the elderly. At the same time, perturbations in the supramolecular organization of the elastic fiber network lead to alterations in the mechanical properties of the skin, as manifested by loose and sagging skin with reduced resilience and elasticity.
[The fibroblast and its differentiations].
Structural and functional changes of normal aging skin.
Solar-induced cutaneous changes are more prevalent and profound in older persons and, thus, are often inappropriately attributed to the aging process, per se. Structural and functional alterations caused by intrinsic aging and independent of environmental insults are now recognized in the skin of elderly individuals. Structurally the aged epidermis likely becomes thinner, the corneocytes become less adherent to one another, and there is flattening of the dermoepidermal interface. The number of melanocytes and Langerhans cells is decreased. The dermis becomes atrophic and it is relatively acellular and avascular. Dermal collagen, elastin, and glycosaminoglycans are altered. The subcutaneous tissue is diminished in some areas, especially the face, shins, hands, and feet, while in others, particularly the abdomen in men and the thighs in women, it is increased. The number of eccrine glands is reduced and both the eccrine and apocrine glands undergo attenuation. Sebaceous glands tend to increase in size but paradoxically their secretory output is lessened. The nail plate is generally thinned, the surface ridged and lusterless, and the lunula decreased in size. There is a progressive reduction in the density of hair follicles per unit area on the face and scalp, independent of male-pattern alopecia. The hair shaft diameter is generally reduced but in some areas, especially the ears, nose, and eyebrows of men and the upper lip and chin in women, it is increased as vellus hairs convert to cosmetically compromising terminal hairs. Functional alterations noted in the skin of elderly persons include a decreased growth rate of the epidermis, hair, and nails, delayed wound healing, reduced dermal clearance of fluids and foreign materials, and compromised vascular responsiveness. Eccrine and apocrine secretions are diminished. The cutaneous immune and inflammatory responses are impaired, particularly cell-mediated immunity. Clinical correlates of these intrinsic aging changes of the skin include alopecia, pallor, xerosis, an increased number of benign and malignant epidermal neoplasms, increased susceptibility to blister formation, predisposition to injury of the dermis and underlying tissues, delayed onset and resolution of blisters and wheals, persistent contact dermatitis, impaired tanning response to ultraviolet light, increased risk for wound infections, prolongation of therapy necessary for onychomycosis, and thermoregulatory disturbances.
Aged, 80 and over
Sebaceous Glands/cytology
Sweat Glands/cytology
Reactive oxygen species were generated using a hypoxanthine and xanthine oxidase system, and elastin promoter activation was measured using cells derived from transgenic mice containing the human elastin promoter.
Free radical generation resulted in a greater than sixfold increase in elastin promoter activity, and this increase was blocked with the addition of catalase.
Elastin promoter activation may play a role in the generation of solar elastosis in photoaged skin. Utilizing hypoxanthine and xanthine oxidase with the in vitro transgenic photoaging model results in a sensitive system for evaluating agents that may prevent oxidative damage.
Aged skin: a study by light, transmission electron, and scanning electron microscopy.
The fine structural organization of the epidermis, dermal/epidermal junction, and dermis from an unexposed site (upper inner arm) of elderly people was compared with the organization of a similar region of young people. Despite an overall thinning of the epidermis and focal areas of cytologic atypia, the characteristic morphological markers associated with the keratinization process are not markedly altered in appearance or amount. A well-formed stratum corneum consisting of flattened, enucleated horny cells enveloped by a thickened membrane, and intracellular spaces filled with electron-dense material provide structural evidence that barrier ability is not compromised in senile skin. The dermal/epidermal changes in aged skin are marked and have significant physiologic implications. The major change is a relatively flat dermal/epidermal junction resulting from the retraction of the epidermal papillae as well as the microprojections of basal cells into the dermis. This flattening results in a more fragile epidermal/dermal interface and, consequently, the epidermis is less resistant to shearing forces. Retraction of the epidermal downgrowths (preferential sites of the putative epidermal stem cell) may also explain the loss in proliferative capacity associated with the aged epidermis. The three-dimensional arrangements of collagen and elastic fibers showed marked alterations with age. Both fibrous components appear more compact because of a decrease in spaces between the fibers. Collagen bundles appear to unravel, and the individual elastic fibers show signs of elastosis. These changes may contribute to the loss of resilience that is one of the salient features of senile skin.
[The aging of connective tissue. Molecular and cellular aspects].
Connective tissues are made of cells and extra-cellular matrix. The predominant cells in vascular connective tissue are smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts and endothelial cells. All these cells actively synthesize the macromolecules of the extracellular matrix. This matrix comprises four types of macromolecules: collagens (11 types known), proteoglycans (8 to 10 types known); elastin and structural glycoproteins (more than a dozen known). Ageing of the connective tissue concerns therefore ageing of its cells and the extracellular matrix. For all connective tissue cells, the limit of proliferation (limit of Hayflick) was verified. The ageing of the matrix is different according to the macromolecules considered: rigidification (cross-linking) of collagen, degradation of elastin, decrease and alteration of the proteoglycans ratio. Structural glycoproteins such as fibronectin may be increased in the plasma and the tissues. Connective tissues diseases are implanted on these qualitative and quantitative modifications of the connective tissues.
The histological, ultrastructural, morphometrical and histochemical aspects of the arterial media were studied in young and aged SHR, and compared to normotensive Wistar Kyoto rats. The diffuse thickening was the most characteristic feature of the hypertensive media. It seems due to three processes: Early generalized hypertrophy of smooth muscle cells (smc); connective matrix neogenesis and smc proliferation, more evident in peripheral vasculature. The present paper discusses the following hypertensive tunica media changes in relation to the atherosclerotic process: the decrease in lipolytic esterase and cholinesterase activities; the activation of some lysosomal enzymes; the increase in collagen, glycosaminoglycan and elastin content; the increased media thickness; the modified smc behavior (migration, secretion, proliferation). These alterations might positively influence arterial susceptibility to atherosclerosis through reduced smc lipolytic activity; slowed transmural diffusion; perturbed efflux and aggravated media hypoxia.
Age-related changes in the level of circulating elastin-derived peptides in serum from normal and atherosclerotic subjects.
The level of the circulating elastin-derived peptides (CEDP) in the serum is believed to reflect the activity of the degradation of the elastic structures. This paper reports a new method, based on the 'sandwich' version of the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), for the detection and quantification of CEDP in human serum. By this method we investigated the age-related changes in their level among healthy subjects within the age range of 1 and 75 years and among atherosclerotic subjects aged 50 to 75 years. The highest level of CEDP was found in the serum of the atherosclerotic patients, and the lowest, among the healthy subjects between 18 and 50 years of age.
We measured the physiologic and stereologic response to 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4 microgram of porcine pancreatic elastase instilled in a volume of 0.25 ml 0.9% NaCl/100 g body weight into the trachea of groups of young and adult hamsters. The young hamsters averaged 50 g and the adult hamsters 116 g in initial body weight. Twenty-one days after administration of elastase, lung volumes, static lung compliance, maximum expiratory flow, the whole section mean linear intercepts (MLI) were measured. The degree of emphysema increased in all animals as a function of dose. Examination of the lung volume and compliance dose-response characteristics indicated that young hamsters developed less physiologic change with increasing elastase dose than did adult hamsters. Maximum expiratory flow and whole section MLI dose-response were similar in the young and adult elastase-treated groups. However, the MLI in young hamsters treated with the 0.4 microgram elastase dose was decreased in the outer third of the lung compared to adult emphysematous hamsters. Also, mean airspace density relative to saline control values in young hamsters was double that found in adult hamsters treated with the 0.4 microgram elastase dose. Although serum alpha 1-globulin levels were equivalent in both young and adult normal hamsters, values normalized for lung elastin content were significantly increased in young animals. We conclude that young hamsters show less change in lung function as a function of elastase dose twenty-one days after elastase instillation. Possible reasons for this include an increased ratio of lung alpha 1-globulin/lung elastin in young hamsters, their continued ability to grow new alveoli, and age related differences in airway size favoring a central distribution of enzyme.
Effect of elastin peptides on human monocytes: Ca2+ mobilization, stimulation of respiratory burst and enzyme secretion.
The effect of elastin peptides (Kappa-elastin) was investigated on human monocytes. The data presented here indicate that elastin peptides increase the intracellular Ca2+ level measured by Quin 2 fluorescence and mediate the release of beta glucuronidase and elastase. The O2 consumption and H2O2 release were stimulated in a dose-dependent manner. The early rise of cAMP was followed by a return to the original level at 30 min and by a concomitant increase of cGMP level. The action of elastin peptides on intracellular calcium level and cGMP levels may well be related to its previously demonstrated chemotactic activity. These activities may well play a role in the modifications of the extracellular matrix following elastin degradation as observed in atherosclerosis, emphysema and aging.
Elastin and elastase-like enzyme change in aorta of rat with malignant hypertension.
In order to study the role of elastin in arteries with respect to hypertension and hypertensive arterial disease, aortic elastin content and elastase-like enzyme activity were examined and compared in stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRSP), which show malignant hypertension, and Wistar-Kyoto normotensive rats (WKY). The elastin content was lower, whereas the elastase-like activity was higher at 20 weeks of age in SHRSP than in WKY, so that the aortic elastin/enzyme ratio of SHRSP was lower than that in WKY. These differences were not found at 6 weeks of age (prehypertensive stage). For SHRSP anti-hypertensive treatment resulted in lowering the elastase-like activity and in increasing the elastin content in comparison to untreated animals. The subcellular distribution of the elastase-like activity closely correlated with that of 5'-nucleotidase activity, a plasma membrane marker enzyme. The results indicate involvement of a smooth muscle plasmalemmal elastase-like enzyme in vascular connective tissue metabolism in health and possibly also its participation in hypertensive arterial diseases.
Postnatal changes in the rheological properties of the aortic wall were investigated in relation to morphological development of the wall in Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats at 3, 8 and 20 weeks old. The mechanical tensile characteristics of the longitudinal wall strip excised from the proximal thoracic aorta were assessed with stress-strain and stress-relaxation tests. Wall tension in the low and medium strain ranges was significantly lower in 3-week-old rats than in 8-week-old rats and in 8-week-old rats than in 20-week-old rats. Wall stress was significantly lower in 3-week-old rats than in 8- and 20-week-old rats mainly in the medium strain range, but was significantly greater in 3-week-old rats than in 8- and 20-week-old rats in the high strain range. The value of incremental elastic modulus at 3 weeks old was significantly smaller than that at 8 and 20 weeks old at a strain of 0.25 and significantly larger than that at 8 and 20 weeks old at a strain of 0.50. The value of relaxation strength at 5 min after the stretching was significantly greater at 3 weeks old than that at 8 and 20 weeks old. The wall was viscoelastic in the low and medium strain ranges at 3 weeks though large wall stress was generated in the high strain range. Histological investigation revealed that the smooth muscle layer, fine elastin fiber connecting thick elastin fibers and wall thickness were thin at 3 weeks old in comparison with those at 8 and 20 weeks old, though there was no significant difference in number of nuclei of the smooth muscle cells among the three age groups. Changes in the tensile characteristics of the wall reflected well those of the microstructure of the wall with growth. The rheological properties and microstructure of the aortic wall were close to maturation at 8 weeks in SD rats.
J-STAGE, Japan Science and Technology Information Aggregator, Electronic
Aging changes known to occur in Bruch's membrane may be associated with drusen formation and retinal pigment epithelial mottling, which often have a peripheral as well as a macular distribution. Few details of peripheral Bruch's membrane aging changes have been reported. We conducted a histochemical investigation of Bruch's membrane in 31 postmortem donor eyes and an ultrastructural morphometric investigation of these regional changes in a subgroup of 22 eyes. The age of our donors ranged from 12 days to 80 years. When we reacted 5 micron paraffin embedded sections of chorio-retinal complex fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde-1% paraformaldehyde, we observed increased PAS positivity, and staining with Weigert's elastin and alcian blue at pH 2.5 in Bruch's membranes from donors over 46 years. In this older group, the macula showed increased histochemical reactivity for glycoconjugates, glycosaminoglycans, collagen and elastin as compared with the equator and periphery. Thickening of Bruch's membrane was first detected in the periphery in tissue from donors aged 10 to 45. Thickening of macular Bruch's membrane was first detected in tissue from donors older than 45. The major proportion of thickening, which appears to be due to the deposition of fibrillar and amorphous material, occurred earlier in the inner than the outer collagenous zone. The equatorial region was relatively spared. Our findings confirm and extend the observations of the timing, regional predeliction, and extent of Bruch's membrane aging changes.
Ultrastructure of the lamina propria of the human ductuli efferentes and ductus epididymidis.
The cellular and connective tissue constituents of the lamina propria of the ductuli efferentes and the ductus epididymidis of prepubescent, adult and senescent men were studied by means of electron microscopy. Layers of contractile cells showing features of smooth muscle cells, alternate with interstitial layers of connective tissue fibers. Additionally to collagenous fibers, in the interstitial layers three types of elastic system fibers, oxytalan, elaunin and elastic, were evident, differing by their varying amount of elastin. Oxytalan fibers, lacking the amorphous component elastin, were present in almost all intercellular spaces along the excurrent duct system, closely related to the contractile cells. They were the only type of elastic system fibers recognizable in the prepubescent epididymal lamina propria. However, in the adult and senescent men, elastin deposits were observed in the middle and outer layers of the lamina propria. In these cases the elaunin and elastic fibers appeared to increase with the gradual proximo-distal thickening of the subepithelial coat of contractile cells. In senescent men, only in few cases the epididymal lamina propria showed some alterations. It is suggested that these changes are not related to age but more likely to the state of individual testicular function. The functional significance of the special architecture of the epididymal lamina propria is discussed.
Longissimus muscle quality, palatability and connective tissue histological characteristics of bulls and steers fed different energy levels and slaughtered at four ages.
Mandigo RW
One hundred forty-four Angus male calves were assigned to one of five slaughter-age groups: 9, 12, 15, 18 and 24 mo of age. After weaning, one-half of the calves within slaughter age were castrated. One-half of the 12-, 15-, 18- and 24-mo age groups of each sex were further randomly allotted to a high-energy (HE) or low-energy (LE) finishing diet. Eight bulls and eight steers assigned to the 9-mo slaughter group were fed the HE diet only. Samples from the longissimus muscle (LM) were taken at the 12th rib for histological evaluations of fat deposits. Thin sections from the LM at the 11th rib were stained for lipid, collagen and elastin. Steaks from the LM were cooked and evaluated by a sensory panel and sheared by a Warner-Bratzler shear (WBS) device. The 9-10-11th rib sections were separated into muscle, fat and bone. Collagen, elastin and collagen solubility were determined chemically. Bulls had heavier carcasses, less fat and lower sensory scores for tenderness and juiciness than steers. Steers fed the HE diet had lower WBS values than bulls on either diet. Cooking losses were higher for bulls at 12, 18 and 24 mo than for steers. Histological evaluation showed that collagen content was higher for bulls than for steers and higher for cattle fed the LE diet than those fed the HE diet. Among cattle on the HE diet, the 9-mo cattle had more collagen than all older groups. Neither sex nor diet had an effect on elastin content shown by histological evaluation, but 12-mo cattle had the most elastin and the 15- and 18-mo cattle had the least elastin. Collagen content determined by chemical analysis was not affected by sex, diet or slaughter age. Correlation coefficients among histologically and chemically evaluated collagen and elastin and meat traits were too low to be of practical importance. The time-intensive histological techniques used in our study provided little additional information over that obtained from visually evaluated or chemically measured meat traits.
Age-related changes in elastic fibers and elastin of lung.
The effect of age on the lung elastic tissue of inbred BALB/c mice were studied. Static compliance of excised lungs increased with age. Morphometrically determined total elastic fiber length increased with lung expansion in age- and sex-matched mice (r = 0.83, P smaller than 0.001), indicating an axial extension of elastic fibers. However, total elastic fiber length of aging lungs fixed at a distending pressure of 15 cm H2O showed no significant change despite an age-related increase in lung volume (male, r = 0.96, P smaller than 0.001; female, r = 0.95 P smaller than 0.001). The correlative finding of decreased elastin content (r = -0.87, P smaller than 0.001) indicates that there is a loss of elastic fibers in the aging lung. It is suggested that the absence of pseudoelastin fibers, as demonstrated by histochemical techniques, accounts for the observed differences in elastin content of aging human and mouse lungs.
Damage and repair of lung connective tissue in rats exposed to toxic levels of oxygen.
We studied damage and repair of lung connective tissue in rats exposed to toxic amounts of oxygen by measuring lung content of collagen and elastin and the number of collagen fragments in lung lavage fluid after exposure to 98% O2 for 60 h. Lung collagen was decreased 17%, and collagen fragments in lavage fluid were increased 4- to 5-fold in O2-exposed rats compared with those in control rats. No biochemical evidence of elastin degradation was found. Mild emphysematous changes and a leftward shift of fluid-filled, pressure-volume curves were induced within 2 wk after recovery from exposure to O2. Administration of the lathyrogen beta-aminopropionitrile worsened the emphysematous lesion produced by hyperoxia, suggesting that replacement of connective tissue during repair limits the extent of emphysema. We conclude that lung collagen is degraded and an emphysematous lesion is produced by relatively short exposure to toxic amounts of oxygen.
Longitudinal gradients of collagen and elastin gene expression in the porcine aorta.
The physical and chemical properties of the mammalian aorta are known to vary as a function of distance from the heart. These properties are highly dependent collagen and elastic fibers. In order to evaluate the mechanisms which regulate the accumulation of these two connective tissue proteins, gene expression was evaluated at both the biosynthetic and messenger RNA levels. Short-term (3 h) explant cultures of the medial portion of four segments of the descending aorta in newborn pigs were incubated in the presence of [3H] proline. Collagen production was quantified by collagenase digestion and elastin production was determined by immunoprecipitation. Between the conus arteriosus and the bifurcation of the iliac arteries, relative collagen synthesis increased 2-fold (from 5.8 to 12.0% of total protein synthesis), while relative elastin synthesis declined 10-fold (from 16.4 to 1.6% of total protein synthesis). Similarly, collagen production increased more than 7-fold (from 6.7 to 49.8 X 10(3) molecules/cell/h) while elastin production was reduced more than 3-fold (from 71.8 to 21.0 X 10(3) molecules/cell/h) along this developmental gradient. Elastin synthesis appeared to be controlled to a significant extent by the availability of elastin mRNA, since both cell-free translation and molecular hybridization to a cloned elastin gene probe showed gradients of elastin gene expression. Similarly, collagen synthesis was apparently regulated, at least in part, by an inverse gradient of collagen mRNA, as measured with a cloned cDNA for the pro-alpha 1(I) collagen gene. Marked changes in the amount of non-elastin protein synthesis accompanied differentiation and accounted for larger changes in relative synthesis. These results suggest that the phenotype of the cells of the porcine artery wall is distinct in different regions of this organ at this developmental stage.
A critical assessment of different methods for measuring elastase activity in crude preparations has been made using whole intestinal homogenates of Dover sole. The use of the natural substrate elastin or its dyed derivatives gave optimal pH values in the alkaline region (pH 9.4-9.8) whereas artificial substrates showed optimal hydrolysis nearer neutrality in the region pH 8.1-8.2. Exoproteases may interfere with certain assay procedures. The properties of Dover sole elastase have been further investigated using chromatographic techniques which indicated that the main elastase activity has a molecular weight of approximately 19,500 and an isoelectric point in the region of pH 5.7.
Connective tissue alterations in skin exposed to natural and therapeutic UV-radiation.
Aging of human skin represents a complex situation where several factors contribute to the age-related changes. One of these factors relates to UV-radiation, but the exact mechanistic details are not well established. Several morphologic studies have indicated definite changes in the quantitative aspects of dermal connective tissue components, collagen and elastin. Also, recent biochemical studies have suggested that UV-irradiation can alter the metabolism of these proteins in the skin. This review summarizes the current state of knowledge of the effects of natural and therapeutic UV-radiation on dermal connective tissue, and further delineates additional research needs necessary for disclosure of the exact mechanistic details of the aging processes in human skin.
Expression of 36-kDa microfibril-associated glycoprotein (MAGP-36) in human keratinocytes and its localization in skin.
Department of Biochemical Engineering and Science, Kyusyu Institute of Technology, Iizuka, Fukuoka, Japan.
Microfibril-associated glycoprotein-36 (MAGP-36) is a recently isolated elastin-binding protein and considered to be a member of microfibril-associated glycoproteins (MAGPs). We studied the expression of MAGP-36 in cultured normal human keratinocytes and its localization in the skin. MAGP-36 was found to be expressed in cultured human keratinocytes by Western blot and RT-PCR assays. The levels of MAGP-36 (polypeptide and mRNA) and the number of MAGP-36-producing keratinocytes were greatly increased during Ca(2+)-induced differentiation of keratinocytes. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated that MAGP-36 colocalized with elastic fibers and formed candelabra like-fibers in the superficial dermis of normal skin. In the elderly skin of sun-exposed region, immunoreactivity of MAGP-36 in the superficial dermis disappeared. In the lesional skin of pseudoxanthoma elasticum which is an elastin-related disorder, immunoreactivity of MAGP-36 was found in the accumulation of disintegrated elastic fibers. The results show that MAGP-36 is a component of elastic fibers in the dermis and co-operates with elastin in normal and diseased conditions.
The fibroblast, major cell of connective tissue, secretes the various elements of interstitium: collagens, proelastin, glycoproteins and proteoglycans. It maintains the turnover of these structures and intervenes, also, in the cholesterol LDL metabolism. These various properties explains its different morphological aspects. In young patients, it is an active secretory cell. Its voluminous cytoplasm contains a well developed endoplasmic reticulum and others organelles. It is always in close connection with collagen fibers. The cytoskeleton consists of a fine network visible throughout the cytoplasm and near of secretory areas. In adult patients, the fibroblast keeps the same characteristics, but the endoplasmic reticulum is poorer than in young subjects. In old patients (physiologic or pathologic ageing) it becomes a quiescent cell. It is a flattened cell; its cytoplasm contains a poorly developed endoplasmic reticulum and numerous dense bodies. Its cytoskeleton is characterized by voluminous fascicles or bundles of microfilaments into large cytoplasmic areas. This modified fibroblast has not direct contact with collagen. In all cases, various stimuli can: activate the fibroblast. Then this cell becomes a large cell with very abundant reticulum endoplasmic, ribosomes, polysomes, and numerous secretory vesicles. It is an active secreting cell; becomes fibroblast and; change into myofibroblast by presence of myofilaments in its cytoplasm.
Elastin accumulation in the extracellular matrix of cultured rat aortic smooth muscle cells was monitored as a function of age. The effect of the animal donor age and time in culture in single or consecutive passages on the cells' ability to accumulate total protein as well as elastin was evaluated. Smooth muscle cells were obtained from animals ranging in age from 2 d to 36 mo. Protein accumulation by the cells based on DNA content was similar regardless of which of the above aging parameters was examined. Although there were significant amounts of elastin present in the extracellular matrix of those cells originating from the younger animals (2 d and 6 wk old), little or none was detected in cell cultures derived from the oldest animals. A soluble elastin-like fraction which was isolated from the cultures of the 2-d-old rats seemed to be lacking in the cultures of cells from the 36-mo-old animals. This observation may, in part, explain the absence of insoluble elastin in the matrix of some cultures obtained from older animals. The data strongly suggest that the age of the donor animal from which the cells originate has the greatest influence on in vitro elastin accumulation.
In this review article, the effects of old age on lung structure and function are discussed. Changes in lung morphology and biochemistry are correlated with changes in lung mechanics and gas exchange, as well as with the respiratory system's adaptability to the stresses of exercise and sleep. The effects of aging on the lungs' defense mechanisms are related to pulmonary diseases of the elderly.
Lung collagen and elastin after ozone exposure in vitamin B-6-deficient rats.
The effects of vitamin B-6 deficiency and ozone exposure on selected features of connective tissue metabolism in lung were investigated in groups of weanling male rats fed one of three diets: B-6-supplemented, fed ad lib; B-6-deficient, fed ad lib; or B-6-supplemented, restricted to the food intake of deficient rats for 5 weeks. Also, perinatal rat pups were studied that were nursed from dams fed one of the 3 diets from parturition to day 15 of lactation. During the final week of each experiment, half of the rats in each of the groups were exposed to 0.64 ppm of ozone (23.5 h per day). The collagen and elastin content, collagen synthesis rate, total protein synthesis rate, and lysyloxidase activity of lungs were measured. Perinatal pups rendered vitamin B-6-deficient were particularly sensitive to ozone exposure (65% died as compared to fewer than 5% of the ad lib or food-restricted controls). When L-proline incorporation into collagen and total protein was investigated using lung minces, food restriction and B-6-deficiency resulted in about one-half the incorporation normally observed. Total lung lysyl oxidase activity was also decreased in B-6-deficient and food-restricted rats compared to B-6-supplemented rats fed ad lib. Exposure to ozone resulted in increased lysyl oxidase activity and collagen synthesis in lungs from B-6-supplemented rats, but such responses were not observed in B-6-deficient or food-restricted (FR) rats exposed to ozone.
Elastin and collagen in the aortic wall: changes in the Marfan syndrome and annuloaortic ectasia.
Elastin and collagen concentrations were determined in intimal-medial samples of ascending aortas from healthy controls of different ages and from 20 patients with annuloaortic ectasia (AAE). Five patients had the Marfan syndrome. In controls the highest elastin concentrations (estimated from desmosine concentrations or insoluble residues after hot-alkali extraction) were found in children. During aging until 60 years, elastin concentration decreased when determined by the hot-alkali extraction method while desmosine concentration changed less. Aorta samples from the Marfan-syndrome patients showed a great variation of elastin concentration from total lack to normal values. Samples from the other AAE patients could be divided into two groups. One contained clearly less elastin and more collagen than the controls whereas in the other group this difference was less marked. Histological examination of the aortic wall of the first group also showed marked fibrosis accompanied by severe elastin fragmentation and acellularity. From the 15 non-Marfan patients 14 were men. By means of clinical examination these patients could also be divided into "familial" and "nonfamilial" groups, because increased diameter of the aortic root was found in relatives of almost half of the patients. However, there were no differences in elastin and collagen concentrations between the familial and nonfamilial cases. As well, no correlation was found between biochemical findings and diameters of the aortic roots. These results point to altered elastin and/or collagen metabolism in the aortic wall of AAE patients.
The biochemical analysis of samples of aortic connective tissue was carried out in 22 subjects from 9 to 84 years old. Aortic samples were taken at necropsy performed after sudden or, more often, traumatic death. The results suggest that aging of the aorta is accompanied by an increase both in collagen content and in total sugar content when expressed as mg/cm2 while the elastin content, when expressed in the same way, does not undergo any variation.
The borohydride-reducible compounds of human aortic elastin. Demonstration of a new cyclic amino acid in alkali hydrolysate, and changes with age and in patients with annulo-aortic ectasia including one with Marfan syndrome.
Human aortic elastin reduced with [3H]borohydride was analysed by ion-exchange chromatography after alkali or acid hydrolysis. Alkali hydrolysates of elastins contained a radioactive peak that was eluted between proline and leucine. This peak was not present in foetal elastin, but its proportion increased steadily during aging. Aortic samples from patients with annulo-aortic ectasia (aneurysm of the ascending aorta), including one with classical Marfan syndrome, contained less elastin (CNBr-insoluble material) than did the age-matched controls. The proportion of radioactivity in the new peak of all these aortas was low when compared with age-matched controls. Gas-chromatographic/mass-spectrometric analysis suggested that it contained a cyclic derivative of a hydrated aldol-condensation product. The concentration of the cross-link precursors, lysine aldehyde and aldol-condensation product (estimated from the acid-hydrolysis product 6-chloronorleucine and the acid-degradation product of reduced aldol-condensation product) was high in very young aortas but remained quite stable after childhood. No differences were observed in cross-link profiles of acid hydrolysates between pathological and control aortas. A low proportion of radioactivity in the new peak may indicate the presence of young or immature elastin in the pathological aortas.
Portland Press - PDF
The static elastic properties and chemical composition of the rat aorta in spontaneously occurring and experimentally induced hypertension: the effect of an anti-hypertensive drug.
The static elasticity and scleroprotein content of the aorta have been measured in 24 Okamoto spontaneously hypertensive rats aged 22-25 weeks, and 24 Wistars of the same age in which hypertension had been induced by nephrectomy and treated with a steroid. From the age of 4 weeks half the animals in each group were treated with a diuretic drug. By the age of 15 weeks caudal artery systolic blood pressure was significantly lower than control values in both drug-treated groups and remained so until death. Both types of hypertension were associated with larger diameter, thicker-walled and heavier aortas than those in the drug-treated animals. Vessels from Okamoto animals contained more collagen than those from the Wistars, although the collagen content was unchanged by drug treatment. Neither drug nor strain had any clear-cut affect on elastin content. In spite of these differences in wall thickness and chemical composition, values of the functional stiffness of the aorta measured over a wide range of pressure were similar in all four groups of animals. Using a simple model of the aorta in which elastin and collagen bear stress in parallel we find that the relationship between vessel composition and static incremental elastic modulus (structural stiffness) is similar in both models of hypertension and is not changed by drug treatment in spite of the consequent reduction in blood pressure.
Ageing and age-associated disease.
Molecular biology of elastin as related to aging and atherosclerosis.
The structural arrangement of elastic fibers in the splenic capsule from 16 human cadavers ranging in age from 1 month to 76 years was studied by histologic sections stained with selective methods for elastin. In infants the elastic fibers of the splenic capsule were homogeneously intermingled with collagen fibers, an arrangement that stabilizes the capsule during spleen growth and enlargement. With aging, collagen fibers predominate in the outer capsular surface over elastic fibers with the latter more evident in the deep lamina of the splenic capsule. In elderly individuals, the elastic fibers shorten, fragment, and thicken. The progressive decrease in the amount of elastic fibers in the splenic capsule with aging may restrict splenic distention and contribute to involution of the spleen as one grows older.
Thomas Jefferson University, Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, 233 South 10th Street, Suite 450, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. Jouni.Uitto@mail.tju.edu
Age and the chemical constitution of normal human dermis.
Staining and Labeling
Staining and Labeling
Investigation of staining, polarization and fluorescence-microscopic properties of pseudo-elastic fibres in the renal arterial system.
Staining and Labeling
[The coronary artery in children and youhng adults. A light and electron microscope study].
Staining and Labeling
Mucosubstances in the chicken aorta. 1. Changes with age in acid mucopolysaccharides, glycoproteins, collagen and elastin.
Thomas Jefferson University, Dept. of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, 233 South 10th Street, Suite 450, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. jouni.uitto@mail.tju.edu
Aortic aging and its connection with arteriosclerosis. Experimental research.
Sulfate metabolism in lathyrism and aging.
Immunology and aging.
Allergy and Immunology*
The macromolecules of the intercellular matrix of the arterial wall: collagen, elastin, proteoglycans, and glycoproteins.
Influence of maturation and aging on mechanical and biochemical parameters of rat bone.
Bone and Bones/metabolism
Bone and Bones/physiology*
Lung scleroproteins in age and emphysema.
Chemical compositions of elastins isolated from aortas and pulmonary tissues of humans of different ages.
1. Elastins were isolated from the visceral pleuras and parenchymas of lungs of humans of different ages. 2. The elastin content of pleuras increased whereas that of parenchymas remained constant with increasing age. 3. The amino acid compositions and carbohydrate contents of elastins isolated from both pulmonary tissues changed in the same way with increasing age of the subjects. These changes were similar to those observed in elastins isolated from the aorta. 4. Similar glycoproteins were isolated from pleuras and aortas, and were more difficult to extract from the elastins of older subjects. Contamination with these glycoproteins was responsible for the changes in composition of elastin, as the age of the tissue from which it was extracted increased. 5. The amount of the cross-linking amino acids desmosine and isodesmosine was lower in elastins isolated from both aorta and pulmonary tissues of senile subjects than those from younger subjects.
Portland Press - PDF
The arterial wall and the process of atherosclerosis.
Characterization of two novel genes, WBSCR20 and WBSCR22, deleted in Williams-Beuren syndrome.
Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS), due to a contiguous gene deletion of approximately 1.5 Mb at 7q11.23, is a complex developmental disorder with multisystemic manifestations including supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS) and a specific cognitive phenotype. Large repeats containing genes and pseudogenes flank the deletion breakpoints, and the mutation mechanism commonly appears to be unequal meiotic crossover. Except for elastin, hemizygosity of which is associated with supravalvular aortic stenosis, it is unknown which of the 18 genes in the deletion area contributes to the phenotype. Here, we report the identification and characterization of two novel genes, WBSCR20 and WBSCR22, which map to the common WBS deletion region. WBSCR22 encodes a putative methyltransferase protein strongly expressed in heart, skeletal muscle and kidney. WBSCR20 encodes a novel protein expressed in skeletal muscle with similarity to p120 (NOL1), a 120-kDa proliferation-associated nucleolar antigen, a member of an evolutionarily conserved protein family. A highly similar putative gene, WBSCR20B, flanks the WBS deletion at the telomeric side. Hemizygous deletion of either of the novel genes might contribute to the growth retardation, the myopathy or the premature aging effects in the pathogenesis of WBS.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
Odland GF
The mechanical properties of skin have been studied both in vivo and in vitro by a variety of test methods. These properties are well matched to the function of the skin, and they depend on the geometry of the collagen and elastin networks of the dermis. The time dependence of these properties is thought to be related to the "ground substance" components of the dermis. Age-related changes in the mechanical properties are a function of the degradation of the elastin network and of some as yet undefined changes in the viscoelastic properties of the "ground substance."
Collagen, elastin and desmosines in three layers of bovine aortas of different ages.
Age related and atherosclerotic changes in aortic elastin.
Growth, development, and healing of large arteries.
[Fluorescent particles of fibrillary proteins and their relationship to "old-age pigments" and to transverse structures].
Biogenesis, maturation and aging of elastic tissue.
[Noninvasive quantitative assessment of atherosclerosis with the pulse wave velocity (PWV) and the computed tomography of the abdominal aorta].
National Cardiovascular Center, Department of Medicine, Division of Atherosclerosis and Metabolism.
Noninvasive quantitative assessment of atherosclerosis should be useful for the prevention of cardiovascular diseases. The pulse wave velocity is a physiological examination and one of the good tool for the determination of sclerosis. Aging and hypertension should be major risk factors to increase the PWV and the higher content of elastin in the arterial wall could make the PWV lower, but few reports exit about the influence of hyper-lipidemia on PWV. The aoPWV in diabetic patients had higher than that in non diabetic and IGT patients. Wall thickening and or calcification accumulation of the lower abdominal aorta was measured to assess the progression of atherosclerosis by using CT and the image colour analysis. We found the good correlation between the aortic calcification-stenosis indices and the coronary stenosis indices, and significant higher levels in patients with cardiovascular diseases.
Arterial mesenchyme and arteriosclerosis. Immunological properties of connective tissue and smooth muscle cells.
Arterial mesenchyme and arteriosclerosis. Enzymic vs non-enzymic factors in the deterioration of connective tissue.
[Aortic elastin and its variations during senescence and arteriosclerosis].
The cross-linking of collagen and elastin and its inhibition in osteolathyrism. Is there a relation to the aging process?
An attempt was made to establish a relationship between the content of elastin and collagen in the rat tissues during the process of aging. The content of collagen fractions and elastin in the rat liver, lung and skin, as well as the elastolytic activity of blood serum were determined. It was found that the concentration of elastin as well as the elastolytic activity of blood serum are increasing during the maturation of rats and the total collagen content is increasing too. After the animals reached the age from twelve to twenty four months--above mentioned values began to decrease. It is concluded that the changes in the content of the two fibrous proteins of the connective tissue depend on age.
Aged, 80 and over
The protein and lipid composition of arterial elastin in ageing and atherosclerosis.
[Glycoproteins in the organization of the intercellular matrix. Ontogenetic, phylogentic and pathological aspects].
Posttranslational protein modifications, with special attention to collagen and elastin.
It is apparent that significant progress has been made in our understanding of the biosynthesis, modifications, and maturation of collagen and elastin. We now recognize and partially understand special reactions involved in hydroxylations within the cell and complex cross-linking processes occurring outside the cell. Recent experiments (191) have shown that in human diploid fibroblast cultures of limited doubling potential (191) the hydroxylation of collagen prolyl residues appears to be "age" or passage-level dependent. With increasing passage level of these cultures, both the ascorbate requirements and the extent of collagen hydroxylation decrease. "Young" cell cultures have a strong requirement for complete hydroxylation and without ascorbate there is only about 50% of the normal level. "Middle-aged" cultures show higher hydroxylation without and full hydroxylation with ascorbate, whereas "old" (or cultures close to "senescence") are incapable of full hydroxylation with or without ascorbic acid. Although the overall system may show some deterioration with increasing passage levels, it appears that with increasing passage levels other components in the cell replace the ascorbate dependence of the hydroxylase system to a greater exten. In some ways, aging WI-38 cultures begin to resemble some transformed cells in their biochemical reactions, although they continue to remain diploid and eventually lose the ability to replicate. It is not yet known whether old animals can produce collagen, which may now be underhydroxylated, perhaps contributing to certain senescent changes. Careful examination of the hydroxylation index of collagen produced in organoid cultures of tissue biopsies as a function of donor age might be informative, particularly if one looks at the quality of collagen by employing collagenase and other proteolytic digests with collagen (191). One could comare the levels of frequent and characteristic peptide triplet sequences such as Gly-Pro-Hyp to Gly-Pro-Pro, Gly-Ala-Hyp to Gly-Ala-Pro, or Gly-Pro-Hyl to Gly-Pro-Lys and others for evaluation of hydroxylation throughout the entire molecule or at selected sequences.
Long-term effects of hypertension on the rat aortic wall and their relation to concurrent aging changes. Morphological and chemical studies.
Elastolytic enzymes and elastin in the aging rat. I. Pancreatic elastolytic enzymes.
Elastolytic enzymes and elastin in the aging rat. II. Antielastoproteinase, antitrypsin and antichymotrypsin levels in serum.
[The skin fibroblast in the course of aging and in some pathological states].
Diabetes in Children and Teens - MedlinePlus Health Information
[A histoenzymatic and histochemical analysis of age-related changes in the fibrous structure of human skin].
Intimal thickening of human femoral arteries with special regard to elastin, Part 1. Diffuse intimal thickening due to growth and age.
In infants, human femoral arteries display seam-like internal elastic lamina (IEL) covered with endothelium on the luminal side and with smooth muscle cells (SMC) on the medial side. At birth the growth of IEL is finished, correlated with a loss of microfibrils (MF) at the periphery. With the onset of the postnatal vessel growth the joints of IEL seem to be mechanically widened until they have the appearance of gaps with progressing age. After the age of 40 years there are often rod-like crystallites in the IEL, probably composed of cholesterol esters. A small first consecutive lamina (CL) can be seen already in childhood; it enlarges until the 3rd decade of life and is interpreted as a substitute to the "fragmented" IEL. After the 5th decade of life the first CL is arranged within the intima at a certain distance from the IEL and consisting of loosely arranged elastic fibrils. In very old arteries (beyond the 8th decade of life) gaps are rarely seen in the first CL. In individuals over the age of 30 years, the space between IEL and the first CL is occupied by smooth muscle cells (SMC) which are tightly packed. Additional CLs above the first CL can be found in elderly individuals, there CL obviously contribute to the intimal thickening. The ultrastructure of the elastic elements of the vessel wall and their possible function are discussed.
Biologically uncommon d-aspartyl residues have been reported in proteins of various elderly tissues. We prepared a polyclonal antibody against d-beta-Asp-containing peptide and examined its immunoreactivity in the skin. The antibody recognized integrated or disintegrated elastic fibers in the sun-exposed skin but not in the sun-protected skin of the elderly donors. Western blot analysis of the proteins isolated from sun-damaged skin demonstrated that the 50 kDa protein was immunoreactive with both antibodies for d-beta-Asp-containing peptide and elastin. Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation on normal skin caused the appearance of d-beta-Asp-containing peptide-immunoreactive fibers in the dermis. These results suggest that UV irradiation is closely related to the formation of d-beta-Asp in the elastic fibers of skin. We propose that the antibody could be a useful indicator for sun damage of the skin.
[Biochemical studies on collagen and connectin from human skeletal muscle: age-related changes in the properties of elasticity (author's transl)].
Collagen and connectin, an intracellular elastic protein, play important roles in structural maintenance and mechanical continuity of skeletal muscle. The author has investigated age-related changes in these proteins from human skeletal muscles ranged from 6 lunar month to 79 years of age. The total content of collagen in skeletal muscle at 6 lunar month was 1.7% of wet weight of the tissue. This value was found to decrease to 0.8% by 5 years of age, and no significant change in this value was observed after 5 years of age. Collagen in skeletal muscle tissue was found to consist of 80% of Type I collagen, 19% of Type III collagen and 1% of Type IV collagen. The proportion of these genetically distinct types of collagen was constant throughout the whole life-span. The amount of soluble collagen and formation of reducible cross-links of collagen were found to decrease with age. Although the content of connection in skeletal muscle from human embryo was low, 0.9-1.1% of wet weight of the tissue, it gradually increased to 2.9% at 79 years of age. Following NaB3H4 reduction, connectin was found to contain the reducible cross-links derived from lysine- and hydroxylysine-aldehydes; two of them were identified as lysinonorleucine and histidino-hydroxymerodesmosine, and additional three reducible compounds were eluted between elution positions of dihydroxylysinonorleucine and lysinonorleucine from ion exchange chromatography. These findings strongly indicate that connectin and connective tissue proteins, collagen and elastin, share common features of cross-linking. Furthermore, these reducible cross-links were found to decrease with age. Thus, maturations of both connectin and collagen are apparently due to qualitative changes in their reducible cross-links.
The synthesis of soluble and insoluble elastin in chicken aorta as a function of development and age. Effect of a high cholesterol diet.
Netherlands
Leg Injuries and Disorders - MedlinePlus Health Information
Connective tissue metabolism in swine. 1. Age related changes in levels of total and soluble hydroxyproline, elastin, hexosamine and non-collagen protein levels in the uterus and aorta during growth.
The structure and composition of the maturing pulmonary circulation.
Matrix-directed regulation of pericellular proteolysis and tumor progression.
The microenvironment of cancer cells, composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) macromolecules, plays a pivotal function in tumor progression. ECM preexisting modules or cryptic sites revealed by partial enzymatic hydrolysis positively or negatively regulate matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression and activation, further influencing matrix invasion by cancer cells. Pericellular activation of gelatinase A (MMP-2) proceeds via the formation of a complex involving its inhibitor, TIMP-2, its activator(s), MT-MMPs and alphavbeta3 integrin forming a docking system. This proteinase has been invariably linked to cancer cell invasive potential and is often predictive of a poor survival. MMP-2 degrades most ECM macromolecules and appears to act as a main 'decryptase'. ECM modulation of MMP-2 activation pathway thus influences angiogenesis and tumor growth. For instance the noncollagenous domain of alpha3 chain of type IV collagen, through alphavbeta3 integrin binding, inhibits both MT1-MMP and alphavbeta3 integrin expression from melanoma cells and empedes cell migration and proliferation. At the opposite, a particular module in elastin (VGVAPG) with type VIII beta turn conformation stimulates MT1-MMP and proMMP-2 activation through binding to S-gal elastin receptor, and increases the matrix invasive capacity of several cancer cell lines and endothelial cells. Endocytosis emerges as a main mechanism controlling MMP-2, and also other MMPs; it proceeds via the formation of a MMP-thrombospondin(s) complex further recognized by the LRP scavenger receptor. ECM undergoes conspicuous variations with aging linked to alterations of tissue organization and post-translational modifications of matrix constituents that modify cell-matrix interactions and MMP-2 activation pathway.
[Elastin and collagen content in normal and functionally inactivated lungs of rats].
Histology, extensibility, and chemical composition of pulmonary trunk in persons living at sea-level and at high altitude in Peru.
Age-related collagen and elastin content of human heart valves.
Physiologic and morphologic observations of the effects of intravenous elastase on the lung.
Rynbrandt DJ
Intravenous administration of porcine pancreatic elastase to hamsters produced significant loss of elastic recoil at low volumes. Histology and mean linear intercept of the lungs fixed at a pressure of 20 cm H2O and studied for 3 weeks after administration of elastase were normal. Larger doses of elastase caused immediate fatal, hemorrhagic pulmonary edema. These results confirmed previous morphologic observations of the effects of intravenously administered elastase, but demonstrated that the loss of elastic recoil at low lung volumes is not invariably associated with histologic changes or morphologically with loss of elastin fibers. These observations suggest that submicroscopic lesions may be present and may antedate the earliest morphologic evidence of emphysema and aging in the lung.
The NaOH sonication digestion technique permits rapid isolation and exposure of intact networks of elastic fibers in vascular tissue for 3-dimensional observation with the SEM. The configuration of the network of elastic fibers within the vascular wall of large elastic arteries (aorta) is generally agreed to be a flexible framework through which smooth muscle cells and collagenous fibers are interwoven. However, the configuration of elastic fiber networks in muscular arteries, medium sized veins and smaller vessels remains unknown. When the lengthy standard biochemical elastin purification techniques were applied to vessels containing lesser amounts of elastic tissue and finer elastic fibers, the vessels were completely digested. In contrast, the digestion and sonication technique isolated and exposed intact networks of delicate elastic fibers in blood vessels which do not contain large amounts of elastic tissue. Unfixed vessels were cut into short segments, placed in 0.5 N NaOH and sonicated for 20-40 min. The specimens were rinsed in deionized distilled H2O, then autoclaved for 30 min. The tissue was rinsed a second time, fixed and processed routinely for SEM. Elastic stains and enzymatic digestion with chromatographically purified elastase and collagenase confirmed that the digestion and sonication technique produced clean, isolated networks of elastic fibers. Knowledge of the configuration of the networks of elastic fibers in different vessels enhances understanding of distensibility characteristics of individual vessels and serves as a baseline for studying alterations in the elastic framework which occur during aging and disease processes such as atherosclerosis, arterial hypertension and aneurysms.
Staining and Labeling
Neutral hydroalcoholic stains with spirit soluble nigrosin (C.I. 50415) and nigrosin base (C.I. 50415B) were applied to a series of human arteries from individuals ranging from newborn to 82 years of age for the demonstration of the selective staining by these dyes of the aging change in their elastica described by Lillie, Pizzolato and Donaldson (1974). The staining is absent in infants and children. It first appears in slight grade in some individuals at age 18. It increases in frequency and intensity with advancing age. It is often seen without obvious other histologic lesion and is regularly present when fibrous and fibroatheromatous plaques appear. In this series it was studied in the aorta of children and in grossly relatively normal areas of the superior mesenteric artery which was selected for the survey because of its usual rather slight involvement in arteriosclerosis. The intensity of the neutral nigrosin staining of the elastica of this artery appeared to be uninfluenced by the extent or severity of aortic lesions in the same individual. This nigrosinophilia appears to be an integral early phase in the development of the arteriosclerotic process and may precede appearance of fibrous or fibroatheromatous plaques by some years. The nigrosinophilia has been assigned (1974) to a lipoprotein alteration of arterial elastica. Prolonged storage in formol in plastic bags induced a strong neutral Solvent black 5 and 7 staining of arotic elastica in the normally negative 10-20 year age group. This reaction is presently considered artifactual, but is being studied further experimentally.
Staining and Labeling
Analysis of the crosslinking components in collagen and elastin.
Bone and Bones/analysis
[Lathyrism and collagens I and III (author's transl)].
The administration of lathyrogenic agents (BAPN) at weak and prolonged doses (9 weeks, 1 g/kg/day) induced in the rat simultaneous alterations of aortic and cutaneous connective tissues comparable to the modifications observed during ageing in man. The lathyrogens produced this effect of inhibiting lysine-oxydase, the enzyme responsible for cross-linking collagen and elastin which leads to an increase in extractable collagen in the tissues. But BAPN did not appear to affect synthesis of collagen either in amount or in types I and III collagen ratio.
Hypertension is a major risk factor for clinically significant atherosclerotic vascular disease in Western Society, although the link between these conditions remains very poorly understood. Recent studies which are reviewed here have demonstrated that major arterial intimal and medial abnormalities occur as a result of hypertension. These include functional changes in endothelial permeability as well as alterations in the endothelial cells themselves with an increase in their turnover and number and distinct changes in morphology. However, endothelial cell loss leading to denudation of the arterial intimal surface appears to be relatively uncommon. Intimal and medial thickening are consistent features of hypertension and result from increases in both cellular and extracellular components. The cells accumulating in the subendothelial space appear to be of both blood-borne and medial origins, although their complete characterization has not been performed as yet. The adherence of blood cells to the endothelial surface appears to be promoted by the presence of hypertension along with their increased entry into the intima through endothelial cell junctions. Medial thickening with hypertension is attributable primarily to increased smooth muscle cell mass, although enhanced deposition of collagen and elastin plays a contributory role. Recent data would indicate that smooth muscle cell hypertrophy rather than hyperplasia is primarily responsible for the greater smooth muscle mass with hypertension. Although elevated DNA content of hypertensive arteries has been demonstrated, such changes may be secondary to a marked increase in cells showing nuclear polyploidy. Prolonged normalization of blood pressure in hypertensive animals can produce considerable regression of arterial changes toward the control state. The changes appear more marked with respect to the cellular rather than the extracellular abnormalities induced by hypertension. In man, little is known about the effects of antihypertensive therapy on the vasculature itself, although clinical complications related to both hemorrhagic or thrombotic strokes are clearly reduced by blood pressure reduction. On the other hand, the influence of treatment on the atherosclerotic process or on the course of coronary artery disease and its complications is not currently understood. The accelerating effect of hypertension on atherosclerosis generally requires a critical level of circulating lipoproteins. Enhanced atherosclerosis is not observed in hypertensive animals without hyperlipoproteinemia or in human subjects with low lipoprotein concentrations.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
The challenge of defining normality for human mitral and aortic valves: geometrical and compositional analysis.
UBC McDonald Research Laboratories/The iCAPTUR(4)E Center, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, St. Paul's Hospital/Providence Health Care, University of British Columbia, Room 292, 1081 Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC, Canada, V6Z 1Y6.
Advances in digital imaging technology and in tools for obtaining detailed quantitation of morphological features have facilitated a new approach to pathological assessment of many tissues, including heart valves. In the present study, we quantitatively examined the tissue geometry and composition of structurally normal mitral and aortic valves removed at autopsy or surgery from patients aged 15-84 years. Through univariate analyses of quantitative variables, we have determined which features change distinctively with age. The anterior mitral valve leaflet (AMV) underwent a statistically significant decrease in area of the valve proper and an increase in the number of superficial tissue accumulations called onlays as the patients aged. For all geometric variables measured in the aortic valve, increases were seen with age, leading to a thicker valve, with enlargement of the valve proper and onlays, and with changes in the number of onlays. The mitral valve proper, composed largely of collagen in younger individuals, showed significant increases in glycosaminoglycans and elastin and a relative decrease in collagen with age. The compositional characteristics of the aortic valve proper were similar to those of the mitral valve, with a dramatic relative increase in elastin and a decrease in collagen with age. Valve onlays, when present, were similar in composition to the valve proper for both valves. Our findings regarding normal valve tissue composition, when taken in the context of geometrical features, and together with evidence of age-related changes in the relative amounts of specific constituents, provide a basis on which to analyze human heart valves affected by various known or putative diseases.
Aged, 80 and over
Interaction between elastin and elastases and its role in the aging of the arterial wall, skin and other connective tissues. A review.
Elastic fibers are progressively lysed during maturation and aging and in an accelerated fashion in several aging diseases such as diabetes, arteriosclerosis, emphysema and several skin diseases. Several enzymes (elastase-type proteases) were isolated in recent years in our laboratory which appear to be involved in these processes. A cell membrane bound serine protease was isolated from arterial smooth muscle cells and was shown to increase with in vitro aging of the cells. A metallo-protease was isolated from skin fibroblasts and was shown to be capable of attacking the constituents of elastic fibers, mainly the microfibrillar glycoproteins and also the desmosine cross linked elastin in vivo. This partially purified fibroblast enzyme was shown to attack these elastic fibers when injected into the dermis. A new selective staining procedure was used to visualise and quantitate, by computerized image analysis, the skin elastic fibers in normal and pathological human or animal skin biopsies. This method, combined with the injection of elastase in rabbit skins, alone or together with inhibitors, enables the ex vivo/in vivo study of elastase action (and of its inhibition).
On examination in the electron microscope elastic tissue is seen to consist of an amorphous component surrounded by microfibrillar components. The exact relationship between these components is unknown, although during development the microfibrils appear before the amorphous material. In this report we summarize our recent observations on the microfibrillar material. At high magnification the microfibrils are seen to have a poorly staining central core around the periphery of which are arranged more densely staining filaments which appear to wind around the microfibrils in a spiral fashion. Careful measurements of microfibrillar diameters from the aorta of four large species show that there are significant differences in the mean diameter and population distributions with species. The mean diameter of the microfibrils changes with age during fetal and postnatal development. The results of immunoelectronmicroscopic localization of an antibody to a microfibrillar component are reported and the possible roles of microfibrils in elastic tissue formation are examined.
The regulation of elastin production has been evaluated and compared in two systems in the developing sheep: nuchal ligament and lung. Absolute rates of production in explant culture were estimated by immunoprecipitation of newly synthesized elastin and determination of precursor pool specific activities. Lung elastin production increased about 2.5-fold while nuchal ligament production increased about 9-fold during the latter half of gestation. In comparison, the activities of elastin messenger RNA(mRNAE) of these tissues were determined in a cell-free system by immunoprecipitation. The increases in mRNAE activity largely paralleled the rises in elastin production, suggesting that elastin synthesis in these tissues is regulated, at least in part, by the availability of translationally active mRNAE.
[Biomechanical studies of human and animal skin in vivo and in vitro].
With the help of biomechanical and biochemical methods, the dependence of human and rat skin on maturation and aging could be demonstrated in excised samples. Ultimate load, tensile strength, and modulus of elasticity showed a sharp increase during maturation and a slow decrease during aging, in both rat and human skin. In both species, ultimate extension revealed a similar behaviour, but the increase during maturation was less pronounced. The age-depending changes of the mechanical parameters in rat skin were influenced by anisotropic properties, which at least partially could be explained by the existence of the skin muscle layer in rats. Tensile strength of skin was closely correlated with the contents of insoluble collagen, e.g. the degree of cross linking. There was, however, no correlation between tensile strength and the contents of soluble collagen, glycosaminoglycans, or elastin. Further experiments like hysteresis, relaxation, and creeping behaviour indicated that plasticity and viscosity of skin both decrease during maturation and aging. Taking into account the experimental conditions, the results gained "in vivo" correlate with those obtained "in vitro".
Interactions of human and bovine elastins with lipids: their proteolysis by elastase.
The elastase-catalyzed hydrolysis of elastin extracted from young and old human aortas was compared with that of elastin from a bovine source. The course of the elastolysis was followed in the presence of sodium taurocholate and some unsaturated fatty acids. The results obtained suggest interesting correlations between the effects of aging on elastin, interaction of elastin with lipids and its susceptibility to proteolysis by elastase.
The development of immunity to homologous connective tissue antigens was studied with respect to aging in the tight-skin (Tsk) mouse mutant. A delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) response to elastase-solubilized lung peptides in Tsk/+ mice, which became evident at 10 weeks of age and increased in intensity until 22 weeks, was observed. Tsk mice did not demonstrate significant DTH responses when challenged with type I or IV collagen, and normal (+/+) littermates of all ages did not respond to any of the antigens under study. DTH responses could be adoptively transferred to normal +/+ and C57BL/6 mice with spleen cells from 30-week-old Tsk/+ mice; treatment with anti-Thy 1.2 antibodies plus complement significantly reduced the ability of these Tsk/+ cells to transfer DTH reactivity. No antibody activity to the antigens under study could be detected in the sera of Tsk/+ or +/+ mice at any age. These results are discussed with regard to the pathological manifestations observed in the Tsk/+ mutant mouse.
Many studies have delineated the changes in the elastic properties of arterial tissue as a function of age. Despite the fact that viscoelasticity is a prominent feature of these tissues, there is little information or characterization of age-associated changes in viscoelastic properties, over a wide range of smooth muscle activation, particularly in nonhuman tissue where atherosclerosis is not a confounding factor. In the present study, using small sinusoidal length perturbations, we determined the dynamic stiffness properties across a wide range of lengths (stretch ratios from 100 to 135%) and frequencies (from 0.25 to 35 Hz) in strips excised from ascending and descending aortas from six young (2 to 4-year-old) and 12 senescent (10- to 13-year-old) beagles. Studies were performed with the smooth muscle fully activated with calcium and norepinephrine, as well as fully inactivated with cyanide, iodoacetate, and dinitrophenol. There was a cubic nonlinear dependence of stiffness modulus on length only in senescent tissue and, surprisingly, little frequency dependence in tissue of either age. Compared to the young aortas, the three-dimensional surface representing the dependence of stiffness modulus on length and frequency from both the ascending and descending regions of aged aortas was displaced higher on the stiffness axis both with the muscle fully activated and inactivated. This age difference was accentuated at longer lengths. The phase lag between force and length was greater in the young vs. the old strips only in the activated, ascending aortic tissue. We found no age differences in the content of elastin, collagen, or in the collagen/elastin ratio, to account for these mechanical property differences.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
The rate of soluble elastin synthesis was estimated in lung explants from rats of differing ages to better define periods in lung development important to the deposition of lung elastin. Lungs from rat pups at days 1, 3, 7, 9, 12, 15, and 21 post-parturition and from adult rats were incubated in a defined medium containing L-[3H]valine. Following incubation, labelled soluble elastin (tropoelastin) was separated from other soluble proteins by coacervation and electrophoresis on polyacrylamide gels containing sodium dodecyl sulfate. The tropoelastin synthetic rate was then estimated after correcting for differences in recovery of radioactivity as tropoelastin and lung tissue L-[3H]valine specific activity. Maximal rates of elastin synthesis were observed in lung explants from 7-12-day-old rats. The rate of elastin synthesis during this period was 5-8-times the rate observed in adult rat lung (expressed per g of fresh lung) and represented approx. 2% of the total protein synthesis. Moreover, the values derived from lung explant culture for elastin synthesis were consistent with values for lung elastin deposition in the perinatal rat (5-10 micrograms elastin/h per g lung).
Collagen, elastin and structural glycoproteins were measured in 21 intact lungs taken at postmortem examination after sudden death from subjects aged from 15 to 83. The data were expressed as milligrams per cubic centimeter of lung peripheral parenchyma inflated and fixed at the standard pressure of 25 cm H2O to exclude the pitfall of referring to dried tissue weight. The volume/weight ratio of inflated dried lung parenchyma increased significantly with aging; likewise the collagen content decreased and so did the collagen/elastin ratio, while the elastin content did not show any significant correlation with age. The present findings indicate that biochemical, morphological and functional data on the senile lung agree well.
The effect of an oral supplement containing glucosamine, amino acids, minerals, and antioxidants on cutaneous aging: a preliminary study.
Alterations in collagen, elastin, and glycosaminoglycans contribute to cutaneous changes seen in aging skin.
A randomized, controlled, single-blind study was conducted with 53 female volunteers who were supplied with an oral supplement containing glucosamine, amino acids, minerals, and various antioxidant compounds. Hydration properties of the skin as well as textural analysis of the women's fine lines and wrinkles were assessed following 5 weeks intake of the oral supplement and results were compared with those of a control group of 12 individuals who did not take the supplement.
There was a statistically significant reduction (34%) in the number of visible wrinkles as measured by the silflo replicas (P &lt; 0.01) and a reduction (34%) in the number of fine lines (P &lt; 0.06) in the group of women who took the supplement. No significant changes in epidermal hydration were observed in either the control or study groups.
The use of an oral supplement containing glucosamine, minerals, and various antioxidant compounds can potentially improve the appearance of visible wrinkles and fine lines. It does not, however, affect epidermal hydration.
Randomized Controlled Trial
The distribution of elastic fibres in the human ductus deferens from birth to senility was studied by light and electron microscopy. Elastic fibres are lacking in the ductus deferens in infants and children. In the adult ductus deferens, they form two layers in the lamina propria: (1) an inner layer of circumferentially oriented elastic fibres, and (2) an outer meshwork of elastic fibres. Elastic fibres are also present in the narrow intercellular spaces between the smooth muscle cells of the muscular coat, mainly in the inner muscular layer. A layer of elastic fibres surrounds the muscular coat. The ductus deferens of ageing subjects shows fragmentation and disorganisation of the elastic fibre layers of the lamina propria. Elastic fibres in the muscular coat are more abundant than in younger adults, forming larger bundles. Electron microscopy demonstrated the presence of immature elastic fibres at puberty as collections of microfibrils, some of them containing loci of amorphous substance (elastin). In the adult ductus most elastic fibres have a mature appearance. The amount of amorphous substance has increased and the number of microfibrils has decreased. Electron-dense inclusions are present within the amorphous substance. With advancing age the amorphous substance forms large, structureless masses showing abundant electron-dense inclusions and areas of rarefaction. A thin layer of microfibrils is present only at the periphery of the elastic fibres. Whether or not androgenic hormones are in any way involved in the formation of elastic fibres in the ductus deferens and testis is something which requires further study.
Age-related changes in arterial wall mechanics and composition of NIA Fischer rats.
Segments of carotid and tail arteries and descending thoracic aorta were obtained from the NIA colony of Fischer rats at ages 3, 12, 24 and 30 months. Measurements of pressure and diameter were made on intact cylindrical segments under conditions of active (147 mM K+) and passive (Ca2+-free and 2 mM EGTA) smooth muscle. These data were used to compute active and passive mechanics. Contiguous segments were used for the analysis of connective tissue, water and electrolyte contents. Passive stiffness of the carotid and tail arteries increased monotonically with increasing age. Collagen content in the aorta and tail artery generally increased with age, while elastin content decreased in the aorta and carotid artery. The ratio of collagen to elastin increased at all sites with age. Maximum values of active stress response (force development) increased from 3 to 12 months for the carotid artery, but decreased with age (at 24 and 30 months compared to 3 and 12-months) for the tail artery. Changes in relative cell content were such that active cellular force development was the same at all ages for the carotid artery but was smaller at 24 and 30 months compared to the younger animals for the tail artery. Decreased cellular force development by arterial smooth muscle is not an anatomically uniform finding in this animal model.
The left coronary artery of 21-, 28-, and 45-day-old spontaneously hypertensive rats and Wistar-Kyoto rats was analyzed morphometrically to evaluate the structural alterations of the vessel wall during the development of genetically determined hypertension. In 45-day-old rats, hypertension was associated with a significant expansion of the partial volume of collagen and ground substance (119%) within the arterial wall. This change exceeded the concurrent accumulation of elastin (77%) and smooth muscle cell mass (34%). The growth of the muscle compartment was also characterized by a marked increment of rough endoplasmic reticulum (103%). The increase in the mural concentration of fibrous proteins at this early age may be viewed as the initial adverse effect of hypertension on muscular arteries.
[Vasopressor effect of connective tissue protein in renal artery. 2. High amount of collagen and non-collagenous protein in renal artery of hypertensive patients].
Maillard reactions involving proteins and carbohydrates in vivo: relevance to diabetes mellitus and aging.
Age-related changes in composition and mechanical properties of the tunica media of the upper thoracic human aorta.
A cylindrical segment, free of complex atherosclerotic lesions, was resected at autopsy from each of 59 descending human thoracic aortas by cutting just below the level of the first pair of intercostal arteries and 35 mm distal to this incision. Each isolated tunica media was defatted and subjected to successive treatment with EDTA-Tris, 5 M guanidine hydrochloride-Tris, 5 M guanidine hydrochloride-Tris-DTE, collagenase and either trypsin or hot alkali. After each extraction or digestion, the dimensions and weight of the segments were measured and the extracted materials were analyzed and quantitated. This allowed the total content of the various components of the tunica media to be assessed by both gravimetric and analytical means. An age-related rise was observed in the total content of the following components: proteins and glycoproteins soluble in chaotropic solvents (ranging from 24 mg/cm in the youngest samples to 46 mg/cm in the oldest) and collagen (38 mg/cm to 69 mg/cm). In contrast, the total content of elastin remained constant at 70 mg/cm at all ages, but its concentration decreased due to the rise in the concentration of the other tissue components as the tunica media thickened with age. It was also noted that with increasing age there was an accumulation of protein(s) which could not be solubilized by extraction with chaotropic agents or with collagenase, but which could be removed by treatment with either trypsin or hot alkali. Mechanical measurements conducted before and after trypsin digestion on samples previously subjected to purification with the first four agents used suggest that this accumulated protein(s) influenced the elastic response of the tissue to the applied stress by increasing the incremental modulus, the breaking stress, and the hysteresis. After the removal of this additional protein(s), the mechanical behavior of the elastin component was found to be identical in all samples, irrespective of age. It is therefore proposed that the morphological changes and the stiffening observed in the aging aortic wall are not due to degradation of its elastin network but to variations in the supramolecular organization of connective tissue components.
Elastic and precursor fibres in the normal human eye.
Alexander RA
Completely formed elastic fibres consist of a core of amorphous elastin within a mantle of microfibrils. The fibrillar component may occur as isolated bundles (oxytalan) or may be randomly intermingled with variable amounts of elastin (elaunin). The distribution of both mature elastic and incomplete oxytalan and elaunin fibres in the different parts of 53 human eyes from foetal life to old age is described, as evaluated by light microscopy of histochemical preparations. In general elastic tissue was most evident in the collagenous structures save the adult cornea in which incomplete elastic fibres occur rarely and then late in life. Precursor forms predominate in early childhood and show a limited and slow capacity for maturation. The suspensory zonular fibres of the lens appear to be composed largely of oxytalan throughout life. There is also evidence that corneal epithelium and endothelium, irideal smooth muscle and, less certainly, retinal pigment epithelium can synthesise the fibrillar component, although not elastin, of elastic tissue.
Synthesis of proteoglycans, collagen, and elastin by cultures of rabbit auricular chondrocytes--relation to age of the donor.
Chondrocytes were isolated from the auricular cartilage of rabbits, aged 1 week to 30 months, and grown in short-term cell culture. The cells from the 1-week animals were small, polygonal, and mononucleated, while the chondrocytes from the older animals were larger, rounded, and frequently binucleated. The synthesis of proteoglycans, collagen, and elastin was determined by isotope incubation. Chemical characterization of the proteoglycans was also performed. The production of the matrix macromolecules showed a clear age dependence with peak synthesis occurring at different ages. Proteoglycans were actively synthesized by chondrocytes from all age groups with a broad maximum between 2 weeks and 5 months followed by a sharp decline to about 50% of the 1-week level at 12-30 months. Collagen synthesis peaked at 2 weeks, declining progressively thereafter to about 60% of the 1-week level at 30 months. Elastin synthesis was highest in the 1-week cultures and thereafter fell quickly to very low levels. In all age groups the chondrocytes synthesized predominantly cartilage-typic proteoglycans, i.e., large aggregate forming molecules containing chondroitin sulfate. Monomers and aggregates showed a size maximum at 2-8 weeks. The degree of sulfation of the chondroitin sulfate and the proportion of 6-sulfate increased with age. These findings support the concept of "age programs" for the biosynthesis and turnover of different matrix macromolecules.
Modification of arterial elastin in vivo. Effects of age and diet on changes in the N-terminal amino acid content of aorta elastin.
We have previously demonstrated that aorta elastin, a highly crosslinked protein, does not undergo turnover that is easily measured in vivo. Therefore, it was hypothesized that when proteolysis of elastin occurs, a positive increase in N-terminal amino acids should result. Such an increase would represent elastin-derived fragments held covalently in situ. A cyanate carbamylation procedure was used to estimate the changes in N-terminal amino acids in aorta elastin. To provide tissue for the studies, Japanese quail (3 weeks old) were fed diets with or without the addition of 1% cholesterol. It was found that, in normal birds, the number of N-terminal amino acid residues increased from two to approximately three residues per 800 total residues (or mole of tropoelastin) throughout sexual development (3 to 8 weeks, post-hatching), with little increase thereafter. In hypercholesterolemic birds, the rate of appearance of new N-terminal residues, particularly glutamine or glutamic acid, appeared enhanced throughout early development, but by sexual maturity the number of N-terminal amino acid residues in aorta elastin from cholesterol-fed birds was similar to that for the control birds. For each of the elastin samples analyzed, approximately one residue of glycine was recovered per 800 total residues. Other amino acids that predominated as N-terminal residues were serine, aspartic and glutamic acids.
Photosensitized growth inhibition of cultured human skin cells: mechanism and suppression of oxidative stress from solar irradiation of glycated proteins.
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85724, USA.
Chronic exposure to sunlight plays a role in skin aging and carcinogenesis. The molecular mechanisms of photodamage by ultraviolet A, the sunlight's major ultraviolet constituent, are poorly understood. Here we provide evidence that advanced glycation end products on proteins are sensitizers of photo-oxidative stress in skin cells. Glycation is a process of protein damage by reducing sugars and other reactive carbonyl species leading to the formation of advanced glycation end products, which accumulate on long-lived proteins such as dermal elastin and collagen during skin aging. Growth inhibition as a result of advanced glycation end product photosensitization of ultraviolet A and solar-simulated light was demonstrated in human keratinocytes and fibroblasts. Using advanced glycation end product bovine serum albumin and advanced glycation end product collagen as model photosensitizers, ultraviolet A-induced formation of H2O2 was identified as the key mediator of skin cell growth inhibition as evidenced by complete protection by catalase treatment and equivalent growth inhibition of unirradiated cells treated with pre-irradiated advanced glycation end product protein. D-penicillamine protected against advanced glycation end product-photosensitized growth inhibition even when added following irradiation, suggesting the feasibility of therapeutic approaches for protection against skin ultraviolet A damage. Photosensitized growth inhibition increased with the degree of advanced glycation end product modification paralleled by the amount of H2O2 formed upon solar-simulated light irradiation of the protein. Photosensitization was not observed using bovine serum albumin modified with the major advanced glycation end product, Nepsilon-carboxymethyl-L-lysine, ruling out effects of cellular advanced glycation end product receptor (RAGE) stimulation. In contrast to bovine serum albumin, unglycated collagen showed photosensitization in CF3 fibroblasts and generation of H2O2 upon solar-simulated light irradiation. This study supports the hypothesis that advanced glycation end product-modified proteins are endogenous sensitizers of photo-oxidative cell damage in human skin by ultraviolet A-induced generation of reactive oxygen species contributing to photoaging and photocarcinogenesis.
Lallemand RC
The variation with age in distensibility and the dimensions of the abdominal aorta at the bifurcation have been measured in 43 fresh human cadavers. The age range was from birth to 69 years, both sexes being represented. Patients with vascular disease were excluded. Barium sulfate infused into the aorta through an iliac artery enabled the change in diameter to be measured from a roentgenogram with change in pressure. Incremental strain value could thus be calculated. Strain value increased from 0.02 at birth to a maximum at the end of the first decade of life and then decreased to less than 0.01 by the age of 70 years. Aortas in the age group of four to 11 years showed less stiffness with increasing pressure than at other ages. Variations of strain with age correlate with alterations in the ratio of aortic wall collagen to elastin in the young. An increase in the thickness of the wall and an atheroma, in response to prolonged hemodynamic stress, account for increased stiffness in the older age groups. Other age and disease factors may play a part, but further work is required in man to examine the role of relative wall thickness, elastic modulus and alteration in wall structure in determining the variation of aortic distensibility with age reported herein.
Comparison of aortic intima and inner media in young adult versus aging rats. Stereology in a polarized system.
Age-related ultrastructural changes in the intima and inner media of rat thoracic aorta were examined by new morphometric techniques. Young adult male rats, 10 weeks old, were compared with 1-year-old male rats. The most marked changes were found in the sub-endothelium, which increased in thickness more than five-fold. Basement-membrane-like and granular material accounted for the bulk of this thickening. Certain other structures were increased sevenfold or more in subendothelium. These structures and the volume fractions they occupied in 1-year-old rats were as follows: banded collagen, 4.3%; mononuclear leukocytes, 4.5%; cystic structures, 3.3%; and fibrillar elastin, 1.0%. Changes were also demonstrated in the fenestrae of and at selected depth levels below the innermost, or alternatively the internal, elastic lamina. Collagen increased strikingly within fenestrae and just below the elastic lamina. This was associated with a 28% increase in the thickness of the elastic lamina and a recession of smooth muscle cytoplasm to a deeper position within the first musculoelastic medial layer. The alterations in subendothelial tissues imply an altered basis for mechanical support for aortic endothelium in aging rats. These results mark the successful application of micro-computer-based stereology to a situation of polarized geometry.
Circumferential strips of pulmonary vessel wall were obtained at necropsy from the major arterial and venous branches at the lung hilum in patients aged 7-87 years. The extensibility of these strips was measured using the tension balance method of Harris et al. (British Heart Journal, 1965, 27, 651-659). The vessels were then bisected, and half of each strip was submitted for structural analysis using morphometric methods on paraffin sections stained to show the collagen, elastin, and muscle content. The other halves of the formalin-fixed vessel strips were examined chemically to determine their collagen content by estimation of the total hydroxyproline content. The thickness of the vessel media was measured microscopically on all of the sections examined. Quantitative measurements were made on 42 arteries and 37 veins. Contrary to expectation, there was a steady fall in medial collagen content with increasing age in arteries and veins. The decrease in collagen content was similar in the morphometric and chemical studies and was statistically significant. The thickness of the vessel media did not change significantly with age. The pulmonary artery and vein strips were less extensible in the older age groups, the main change occurring in the elastic phase of the vascular stress/strain curves. It is suggested that changes in the elastic tissue at a molecular and lamellar level are responsible for the increasing stiffness of pulmonary vessels rather than changes in the medial collagen content.
Elastase-like enzymes in aortas and human breast carcinomas: quantitative variations with age and pathology.
Two neutral proteases have been isolated from aortas and human breast tumors. The aortic elastase-like enzyme has been further purified. The details of this purification procedure will be given and some of the properties of the purified enzyme (susceptibility to various kinds of substrates, degree of inhibition of serum inhibitors, alpha 1-antitrypsin and alpha 2-macroglobulin). This elastinolytic activity of the aorta increased with age and with the degree of atherosclerosis. Both parameters seem to act independently and in a cumulative fashion. Elastinolytic activity has been demonstrated in extracts of human breast carcinomas and is exponentially related to the age of the patient. There exists a parallel neosynthesis of elastin which increased also with the age of the patient. Some characteristics of the polymeric elastin isolated from the tumor tissue will be given. The possible role of this neutral protease present in human aortas and human breast carcinomas will be discussed.
[Maturation and aging of elastic fibers (authors transl)].
The non-sunexposed skin of 12 healthy individuals was investigated under the electron microscope and the fine structure of normal elastic fibers was compared by different methods in 3 groups of age: 1--10 years, 30--50 years, and 60 years. 1. The elastic fibers of human skin may be semiselectively stained with silver tetraphenylporphyrine sulfate (Ag-TPPS), uranyl acetate, lead citrate and tannic uranyl acetate. They are composed of an amorphous matrix which is interwoven and surrounded by microfilaments. Elastic fibers are fully developed in early periods of age, first showing numerous microfilaments as structural glycoproteins, and then the deposition of the amorphous proelastin to be transformed into elastin. 2. The period of maturation is followed continuously by processes of physiological aging: a) decreasing number of microfilaments, b) appearing of electron-dense inclusions into the elastin matrix and c) fragmentation and disintegration of the fiber. 3. These changes indicate that aging of the fiber includes diminished synthesis of structural glycoproteins (microfilaments) and increasing content of osmiophilic groups, such as polar aminoacids, fatty acids and calcium salts. The fiber becomes thus more susceptible to the activity of elastase, and may totally disintegrate in older age.
Caliber and elastin content of the pulmonary trunk.
Internal diameter, thickness of media, and surface density of elastin in media of both pulmonary trunk and aorta were determined in a random group of 100 adults. Because of contrasting results of histologic vs chemical studies of the amount of elastin in the pulmonary trunk, we have used a television image analyzer for objective determination of surface density of elastin in histologic slides, applying the same method to the aorta for comparison. Both caliber and medial thickness of the pulmonary trunk increase somewhat with age. The surface density of elastin in the pulmonary trunk is not influenced by age and averages approximately 26%, with considerable individual variation. In patients with pulmonary hypertension, this percentage is consistently higher. We conclude that the decrease in extensibility of the aging pulmonary trunk is caused by changes in physical properties of the constituents of its wall, rather than by a decreasing elastin content.
The purpose of this paper is to review and to illustrate some of the themes underlying recent research on the aging of connective tissues. The systematic variation with age of the relative rates of biosynthesis (and of degradation) of the macromolecules of the intercellular matrix (collagens, elastin, proteoglycans and structural glycoproteins) is interpreted as the result of an "age program" of matrix synthesis by differentiated mesenchymal cells. This relative rates of synthesis of a well-defined set of matrix macromolecules can be used in its turn to define the state of differentiation (and of aging) of mesenchymal cells. This relative rate of synthesis of a well-defined set of matrix macromole-followed by its degradation through the elastases. The increasing frequency of some diseases with age ("aging diseases" of connective tissues, athero-/arteriosclerosis, diabetes, osteoarticular diseases, etc.) is probably related to this changing composition of the intercellular matrix. Cell-matrix interaction does depend on the secretion of a specific matrix which in its turn influences cell behaviour. With changing matrix composition (changing cell environment) cell behaviour will also change. This informational feedback mechanism may be of great importance in the aging of connective tissues and also in the increasing frequency of some pathologies with age.
Bone and Bones/metabolism
Degenerative processes of elastic fibers in sun-protected and sun-exposed skin: immunoelectron microscopic observation of elastin, fibrillin-1, amyloid P component, lysozyme and alpha1-antitrypsin.
Degenerative processes of elastic fibers in sun-protected and sun-exposed skin were analyzed by light and electron microscopic (post-embedding) immunocytochemistry using antisera to elastin, fibrillin-1, amyloid P component, lysozyme and alpha1-antitrypsin. To assess the effect of aging and sun exposure, biopsy specimens of sun-protected skin (back) and severely and moderately sun-exposed skin (face and forearms) were obtained from a young age group (1-27 years), an adult group (31-56 years) and an old aged group (61-100 years). Elastin and fibrillin-1 were the essential components of elastic fibers; elastin being localized in the electron-lucent matrix and fibrillin-1 in the dense microfibrillar strands. Aging and sun exposure provoked degenerative condensed spots, which represented widened dense microfibrillar strands, in the matrix of altered elastic fibers in the reticular dermis. Amyloid P component was first deposited on the peripheral microfibrils, and then in the intermediate density zone of the spots. Lysozyme was observed in both the electron-dense core and in the intermediate density zone of the spots. Deposition of lysozyme correlated with basophilic degeneration of the elastic fibers. In the severely photodamaged facial skin of the aged, which showed solar elastosis in the upper reticular dermis, fibrillin-1 immunoreactivity was lost from the thickened and vacuolated elastic fibers that lacked condensed spots, and amyloid P component, lysozyme and alpha1-antitrypsin were diffusely deposited in the elastin-positive matrix. It seemed that amyloid P component deposition on the elastic fibers was closely associated with aging, while immunoreactive lysozyme was related to sun exposure. Vertically oriented, thin, elastic (oxytalan) fibers in the papillary dermis tended to decrease with age, with frequent deposition of amyloid P component but no lysozyme. In the facial skin of the aged, dermal papillae disappeared, with the formation of degenerative elastic globules beneath the dermal-epidermal junction. The present study demonstrated an intimate relationship between ultrastructural alterations and deposition of exogenous substances on the degenerative elastic fibers in sun-exposed and/or aged skin.
Aged, 80 and over
Department of Dermatology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, and Syungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. jhchung@snu.ac.kr
Human macrophage metalloelastase is a member of the matrix metalloproteinase family and is involved in degradation of elastin. We investigated the ultraviolet modulation of human macrophage metalloelastase in human skin in vivo. Ultraviolet induced human macrophage metalloelastase mRNA maximally (11.9-fold) within 16 h post-ultraviolet in human skin. This induction of human macrophage metalloelastase by ultraviolet was inhibited by pretreatment with the antioxidant N-acetyl cystein (20%) and vitamin E (5%) by an average of 54% and 47%, respectively, in human skin in vivo. Ultraviolet (30 mJ per cm2) and phorbol ester (12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate, 50 nM) treatment increased expression of human macrophage metalloelastase mRNA and protein in the cultured human dermal fibroblasts, but not in the keratinocytes. Chronically sun-exposed human skin expressed significant amounts of human macrophage metalloelastase protein, which colocalized with the material of solar elastosis, whereas there was little expression in sun-protected skin of the same individuals. This study demonstrates that ultraviolet irradiation increases human macrophage metalloelastase expression in human skin in vivo, possibly in macrophages and fibroblasts, and ultraviolet-induced expression of human macrophage metalloelastase can be inhibited by antioxidant (N-acetyl cystein and vitamin E) pretreatment. Association of human macrophage metalloelastase with elastotic material suggests that it may play an important role in the development of solar elastosis, the hallmark of sun-induced damage in human skin in vivo.
Levels of elastin production in explant culture of fetal sheep nuchal ligament and corresponding levels of translatable elastin mRNA were determined in parallel studies during a period of rapid growth of the embryo. The identity of the explant culture and cell-free products was confirmed by peptide mapping, immunoprecipitation, and the characteristic lack of histidine and methionine. Elastin production was quantitated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and radioimmune precipitation. The translation products could be labeled with methionine only when NH2-terminally donated as f-Met-tRNAfMet. Explant cultures showed a large rise in elastin production from 70 days after conception to 150 days after conception. Cell-free translation of RNA demonstrated a parallel in elastin mRNA levels and in elastin mRNA per cell. It appears, therefore, that the marked emphasis the differentiating nuchal ligament places on elastin production is modulated, at least in part, by the quantities of available elastin mRNA.
Normal postnatal development of the media of the rat hilar pulmonary artery and its remodeling by chronic hypoxia.
The present morphometric and electron microscopic study follows the development of the hilar intrapulmonary artery of rat form 12 hours to 36 days of age and its structural adaptation to hypobaric hypoxia (380 torr) when exposed for periods of 3, 7, 14, and 28 days starting at 8 days of age. In control animals a striking increase in medial thickness is seen at 11 and 15 days of age and is accompanied, at 11 days, by an increase in the organelles of smooth muscle contraction-the myofilaments-and at 15 days, by an increase in rough sarcoplasmic reticulum. From 15 days, a gradual increase in collagen fibrils and elastin occurs in the extracellular ground substance. With exposure to hypoxia, from day 14 medial thickness increases more than the age-matched controls due to an increase in extracellular ground substance and to thickening of the elastic laminae. At all times studied, smooth muscle diameter is similar to the age-matched controls, but the normal fluctuations in volume density of the contractile elements and the rough sarcoplasmic reticulum are blunted. In the extracellular ground substance, the matrix is increased and collagen fibrils reduced, both in concentration and diameter. Thus, in young hypoxic rats, the narrowed lumen and external diameter of the large muscular arteries is associated with abnormal collagen formation. The hypoxia-induced changes in the young rat are different from those reported in the adult in which medial thickening is the result of increased extracellular ground substance with a normal concentration of collagen fibrils and hypertrophy of the smooth muscle cells. In the young lung, the structural changes have more far-reaching effects than the adult since they also interfere with lung growth.
The content of fibrillar proteins was studied in 50 aortas of children dying at the age of 4 to 16 years of various diseases and accidents. In the intact intima of aortas the content of elastin and collagen increased with age. In lipid spots of the vascular wall of children the content of elastin was lower than in the intima, and the amount of collagen was higher than in the normal intima. In 15% of the aortas of children over 10 years of age lipid spots were found the content of collagen in which was above its average levels and biochemically reflected the development of collagen structures in lipid spots with destruction of lipid containing cells and release of lipids into the extracellular space. In rhythmical structures the content of fibrillar proteins increased as compared with normal intima irrespective of the age. The rhythmical structures with lipoidosis were intermediate with regard to the content of fibrillar proteins between "pure" rhythmical structures and lipid spots.
Copper has been shown to be an important cofactor for certain enzymatic reactions. Specifically, cross-linking of elastin is inhibited by copper deficiency. In animal models, this inhibition leads to weakened connective tissue and pathologic changes in the lungs consistent with emphysema. To explore the potential relationship of copper exposure to level of pulmonary function in humans, we examined copper concentrations in tap water in the homes of 297 adult male subjects involved in the Normative Aging Study. Forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) were obtained by standard techniques. The relationship of tap water copper concentration to pulmonary function was explored using multiple regression analysis, controlling for other potential confounding variables (age, height, smoking status, and educational attainment). Separate regressions were performed for each of 3 smoking status groups: never, former, and current. Among never smokers, tap water copper was significantly and positively related to levels of both FVC (p = 0.014) and FEV1 (p = 0.027). No significant trend was found among former or current smokers. These data suggest that copper intake may be an important determinant of level of pulmonary function and deserves further investigation.
[Some theoretical principles of aging research and its use in the aging of arteries. B. The aging of the arterial wall].
Processes of ageing on blood vessels can be made understandable only when special characteristics of structure and function of the artery are known and when a methodology is used which corresponds to these features. In these cases not only a reduction of structural elements are the results, but also qualitative alterations in the composition of fibres and of the basic substance as well as a cell proliferation of the area of the intima. The process of ageing in the arterial wall proceeds discontinuously and with local accentuation. Particularly weighty is the changing of the collagen and glycosaminoglycan synthesis which is dealt with in detail. In cooperation of cells, fibres and basic substance in the arterial wall exists a "micromilieu", the condition of which intensely influences the process of ageing. Influences of ageing on the side of the entire organism are, of course, mentioned in the present paper, but not treated in detail.
Influence of maturation and aging on mechanical and biochemical properties of connective tissue in rats.
The influence of maturation and age on the physical and chemical properties of various organs of connective tissue has been studied in rats at ages of 4 weeks, 8 weeks, 4 monhs, 1 year and 2 years. The changes between young (4 weeks old) and adult (4 months to 1 year old) animals were considered as the effects of maturation, whereas the changes between adult and senescent (2 years old) rats were regarded as the effects of aging. Ultimate values, such as ultimate load, tensile strength and breaking strength, or ultimate modulus of elasticity, showed a sharp rise during maturation and a smaller but significant decrease during aging in all organs, such as skin strips, tail tendons, shaft bones, epiphyseal cartilage and aorta rings. Ultimate strain showed a similar pattern, but the maximum occurred earlier. These changes were parallel with the content of insoluble collagen. Other chemical parameters such as soluble collagen or glycosaminoglycans, showed a continuous decrease during the life span, whereas elastin rose continuously. More detailed analysis of mechanical properties in rat skin gave insight into the viscoelastic behaviour of skin. In creep experiments time until break under constant load rose continuously during the life span, whereas ultimate extension rate showed a sharp fall during maturation and a slow decrease during senescence. Stress at low extension degree and moduli of elasticity at low extension degree were decreased by maturation and increased by senescence, exactly the opposite of the changes at high extension degrees. The so-called step phenomenon was increased due to maturation and decreased due to aging. Relaxation and mechanical recovery were changed in the same direction by maturation and aging. Relative viscoelastic parameters, such as the hysteresis phenomenon and relative decrease of stress under cyclic strain, were barely influenced by the aging process. Changes of most of the mechanical parameters at high extension degrees during maturation may be explained by an increase of cross-linking of collagen. Other phenomena such as changes at low extension degrees or parameters of plasticity cannot be explained on this basis. Further studies are needed for a better understanding of the true aging process in connective tissue.
Landis Award lecture. Questions and signposts in microvascular research.
Handa H
Effect of age and dietary composition on aortic collagen to elastin ratio and on lipid metabolism in F-344 rat.
Mandl I
Cardiovascular Research Group (EA 3448), Faculté de Pharmacie, Nancy and Institut de Pharmacologie and de Médecine Expérimentale, CNRS URA, Faculté de Médecine, Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.
1. Chronic antihypertensive treatment lowers cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. The beneficial effect on the blood vessel wall may be due to the lowering of blood pressure (BP) and, hence, wall stress (WS), or to a treatment-induced change in wall structure. 2. We have previously shown that, when evaluated at the same level of BP and WS, the stiffness of the aortic wall of old spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) is higher than that of young and adult SHR and that of age-matched Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that the intrinsic changes in wall composition and mechanics in old SHR can be modulated by long-term treatment with an angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitor (captopril; 40 mg/kg per day) combined with a diuretic (hydrochlorothiazide; 20 mg/kg per day) and that treatment withdrawal would reveal whether such changes are maintained when BP and WS return to pretreatment levels. 3. We evaluated aortic structure and mechanics in SHR following 1 week withdrawal of oral antihypertensive treatment from 3 to 15 months of age (n = 8). Results were compared with age-matched SHR that were maintained on treatment (n = 12) or were not treated (n = 13) and with WKY rats (no treatment n = 11; maintained n = 11; withdrawn n = 10). 4. Isobaric aortic wall stiffness was estimated from the ratio of baseline aortic pulse wave velocity (PWV) to BP and the slope relating aortic PWV to BP following sodium nitroprusside-induced hypotension. Relative wall stiffening was estimated as the ratio of elastic modulus (EM) to WS. We argued that if treatment produced a change in wall elastin or collagen content, with a subsequent decrease in isobaric wall stiffness, then this would be maintained when BP increased following withdrawal of treatment. 5. In old SHR, treatment lowered isobaric wall stiffness (baseline PWV/BP 4.6 +/- 0.3 cm/s per mmHg; slope relating PWV to BP 6.7 +/- 0.4 x 10-3 cm/s per mmHg and EM/WS 4.1 +/- 0.4 vs 6.1 +/- 0.4 cm/s per mmHg, 9.7 +/- 0.9 x 10-3 cm/s per mmHg and 8.9 +/- 1.1, respectively, without treatment; all P &lt; 0.05). After 1 weeks treatment withdrawal, the indices (5.7 +/- 0.2 cm/s per mmHg, 9.1 +/- 0.2 x 10-3 cm/s per mmHg and 7.2 +/- 0.6) increased in parallel with the increase in WS to levels similar to those observed in untreated SHR. There were no significant differences among the WKY rat groups. 6. Treatment increased the elastin and collagen contents of the aortic wall in both SHR (196 +/- 13 and 128 +/- 5 vs 111 +/- 9 and 86 +/- 4 mg/g wet weight, respectively, in untreated; P &lt; 0.05) and WKY rats (190 +/- 19 and 135 +/- 4 vs 115 +/- 7 and 114 +/- 5 mg/g wet weight, respectively, in untreated; P &lt; 0.05). This increase remained following withdrawal (213 +/- 26 and 118 +/- 4 vs 161 +/- 14 and 127 +/- 4 mg/g wet weight in SHR and WKY rats, respectively). 7. In summary, 1 year of treatment with captopril plus hydrochlorothiazide increases wall elastin content and reduces WS and stiffness in old SHR. Following withdrawal, elastin content remains high, but wall stiffness parallels WS in a manner similar to that in untreated SHR.
Lung scleroproteins in young and adult rat and in rat with spontaneous emphysema: comparative study by biochemical and histochemical approach.
Elastin and collagen in the normal and obstructed urinary bladder.
Histological and chemical studies were carried out on the elastin and collagen content of the normal and the obstructed urinary bladder wall. The observations were made on 3 different age groups: (1) 3-month-old children with vesical outlet obstruction, (2) children aged between 4 and 8 years with partial vesical obstruction, and (3) adults with a chronically obstructed bladder. An increase in elastic tissue was shown only in the newborn and in the adults. The collagen did not vary in any of the cases studied. The elastin showed an increase in polar amino acids in the pathological organs compared with the normal. A similar increase in elastin was observed in normal individuals as a result of the ageing process.
Ultrastructural studies of elastotic material and elastic fibers in aged skin before and after autoclaving.
Elastotic material and aged elastic fibers of patients with solar elastosis before and after autoclaving was studied using the tannic acid stain as well as the conventional stain. The amorphous matrix of the elastotic material and the elastic fibers stained positive with the tannic acid stain. In the fibrous form of elastotic material and in the elastic fibers both electron-dense inclusions and the amorphous matrix remained unchanged after autoclaving, while microfibrils were removed. In the amorphous form the fine granular component and round bodies were removed after autoclaving, and the moderately electron-dense amorphous component with a reticular or net-like appearance remained. It has been suggested that the elastotic degenerative changes are (1) expansion of the electron-dense inclusions to form a larger part of the fiber; (2) transformation of the inclusions into moderately electron-dense material, composing mainly of a fine granular component and an amorphous one; and (3) disorganization of the moderately electron-dense material.
The effect of age on the unfolding of elastin lamellae and collagen fibers with stretch in human carotid arteries.
We measured folding of elastin lamellae and collagen fibers in human carotid arteries and correlated the results with the elastic properties of the vessels. Specimens cut into circumferential strips were stretched to various degrees, fixed, and stained for elastin and collagen. Folding was measured on photographic projections. Elastin lamellae unfolded quickly with initial stretch. In old vessels they did not straighten as much as in the young suggesting that the content of the interlamellar space may interfere with the unfolding. Collagen fibers straightened more during stretch in stiffer older vessels than in the young, already at low degrees of stretch. Young's modulus at extension of 5% appeared to correlate with unfolding of elastin lamellae in young extensible vessels. The modulus correlated significantly with unfolding of collagen fibers at extensions of 15% and greater, and the slope of the regression of the modulus on folding increased with stretch. Our findings provide for the first time morphologic evidence for the role of elastin lamellae in the determination of the elastic properties at low extensions, for the importance of collagen fibers in increasing stiffness with further stretch, and for the relationship between increased stiffness with age and the earlier recruitment of the collagen fibers.
It has been shown that, contrary to desmosine and isodesmosine, the content of pyridinoline increases in elastin preparations obtained from rat and bovine aortae and from bovine ligmentum nuchae throughout the whole lifespan. The molar proportion of this cross-linking amino acid is within the range of 0.6 - 2.5 leucine equivalents per 100 amino acid residues.
Age-related physiological changes and their clinical significance.
Physiological changes occur with aging in all organ systems. The cardiac output decreases, blood pressure increases and arteriosclerosis develops. The lungs show impaired gas exchange, a decrease in vital capacity and slower expiratory flow rates. The creatinine clearance decreases with age although the serum creatinine level remains relatively constant due to a proportionate age-related decrease in creatinine production. Functional changes, largely related to altered motility patterns, occur in the gastrointestinal system with senescence, and atrophic gastritis and altered hepatic drug metabolism are common in the elderly. Progressive elevation of blood glucose occurs with age on a multifactorial basis and osteoporosis is frequently seen due to a linear decline in bone mass after the fourth decade. The epidermis of the skin atrophies with age and due to changes in collagen and elastin the skin loses its tone and elasticity. Lean body mass declines with age and this is primarily due to loss and atrophy of muscle cells. Degenerative changes occur in many joints and this, combined with the loss of muscle mass, inhibits elderly patients' locomotion. These changes with age have important practical implications for the clinical management of elderly patients: metabolism is altered, changes in response to commonly used drugs make different drug dosages necessary and there is need for rational preventive programs of diet and exercise in an effort to delay or reverse some of these changes.
Endocrine Glands/physiology
Age dependent variation of elastin and elastase in aorta and human breast cancers.
Heavy smokers are at risk of aggravating several cutaneous diseases. The main adverse effects of cigarette smoking on the skin are associated with psoriasis, with squamous cell carcinoma and with the poorer outcome of malignant melanoma. One of the main concerns to smokers is the well-documented effect of smoking on premature face aging due to excessive wrinkling, which may follow enhanced elastase activity, and the degradation of elastin in the dermis. Recently, evidence has emerged indicating that smoking induces in the skin the activity of the metallo-proteinase MMP-1 that specifically degrades collagen, the most abundant protein in the cutaneous matrix.
The postnatal development of adrenergic innervation was followed in peripheral blood vessels of Wistar rats. The femoral vessels and their branches, the superficial epigastric and saphenous vessels, and the tail artery, were investigated from birth to maturity. The proximal ends of the vessels were studied with fluorescence microscopy after the catecholamine was converted to a fluorophore by hot formaldehyde vapour, and ultrastructural morphology confirmed that the nerve varicosities mainly contained small vesicles with dense cores, typical of adrenergic innervation. Further confirmation was obtained with reserpine pre-pretreatment, the sodium borohydride specificity test, and experiments to alter the non-specific fluorescence of elastin. The nerves in the arteries were immediately adjacent to the external elastic lamina, and they retained this position throughout postnatal development. Of the three muscular arteries, the development of innervation was earlier and more intense in the saphenous and superficial epigastric arteries than in the tail artery. However, the tail artery surpassed the other two both in the total number of nerves and in the density of innervation per unit area beyond 12 days of age, and maintained this lead to maturity. The superficial epigastric artery had the smallest total number of nerves but had a greater density of innervation than the saphenous. The femoral artery did not develop any appreciable innervation. The femoral vein demonstrated the greatest amount of fluorescence of any of the veins, the others having considerably less innervation than their companion arteries.
Improved methodologies for the isolation and purification of tropoelastin.
Retinoids, retinoic acid receptors, and cytoplasmic retinoid binding proteins in perinatal rat lung fibroblasts.
The early postnatal life of most mammals marks a period of extensive enlargement of the alveolar surface area and increase in the elastin content of the lung. The factors that regulate the onset and abatement of this burst of elastin synthesis have not been identified. Previous studies of lipid-laden rat pulmonary interstitial fibroblasts (LIF) have shown that their elastin synthesis is increased in vitro by retinoic acid (RA). We hypothesized that temporal changes in the endogenous RA content of LIF may correlate with changes in elastin synthesis by these cells. LIF were isolated from the lungs of rats at gestational day 19 and postnatal days 2, 4, 8, and 12 and their retinoid contents were quantitated. Retinyl esters were highest at gestational day 19 (2.9 +/- 0.6 pmol/10(6) cells, means +/- SE) and decreased to 1.6 +/- 0.2 pmol by postnatal day 2 (P &lt; 0.05). This decrease in retinyl esters was accompanied by an increase in retinol from 0.4 +/- 0.1 to 2.0 +/- 0.6 pmol/10(6) cells (P &lt; 0.05). RA increased in LIF from 0.07 +/- 0.04 pmol/10(6) cells at gestational day 19 to 0.29 +/- 0.05 pmol/10(6) cells at postnatal day 2 (P &lt; 0.05) and increased in whole lung tissue from 0.07 +/- 0.04 to 0.29 +/- 0.05 nmol/g, over the same interval. The increase in RA content was accompanied by an increase in RA receptor (RAR)-beta and -gamma mRNAs. The steady-state mRNA level of cellular retinol binding protein (CRBP) was high in LIF, relative to whole lung tissue at day 2. Cellular RA binding protein (CRABP) mRNA rose fourfold from day 2 to day 8 and then fell by day 12. In summary, RA, RAR, and CRBP mRNA in LIF are highest before the period of maximal elastin synthesis, which occurs at postnatal days 8 and 12. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that endogenous RA could contribute to the postnatal increase in elastin production by pulmonary fibroblasts.
Phenotypic stability and variation in cells of the porcine aorta: collagen and elastin production.
The extracellular matrix of the developing vasculature varies in composition as a function of time and position. Cellular models of vascular biology and pathology depend on the assumption that stable phenotypic characteristics of vascular cells can be propagated through several generations of in vitro cultivation. We show that the positional and developmental heterogeneity of matrix phenotypes in the porcine aorta are expressed by explanted vascular smooth muscle cell (SMC) and adventitial cell populations for a limited number of passages. Elastin was expressed most highly by thoracic SMC while interstitial collagen production was usually maximal in abdominal segments. Parallel gradients of collagen types I, III and V, detected by specific ELISA assays, were expressed in early-passage SMC. Adventitial cell populations from the abdominal aorta of the neonatal pig accumulated significant levels of collagen, while these fibroblasts produced less than 10% of the elastin made by SMC. All cell populations expressed alpha-smooth muscle actin in vitro. Gradients of collagen and elastin expression were evident for no more than three passages, and direct outgrowth of cells without limited digestion of the matrix further reduced phenotypic stability. Variation and decline of the elastin phenotype could be due to hypermethylation of regulatory sequences in the elastin gene or trans-acting factors, but elastin production was dose-dependently stimulated to a similar extent (100%; 10 microM 5-azacytidine) in all segmental SMC populations at early (p1) and late (p3) passage. These data indicated that faithful reflection of in vivo SMC behavior was limited to a few population doublings, at least under standard culture conditions. Modification of the cellular environment by reducing serum factors, changing matrix, or adding mechanical stimulation may increase phenotypic stability.
The growth and development of elastic laminae in the mouse aortic media were investigated by light and electron microscopic autoradiography after a single SC injection of L-[3,4-3H]-valine. Because of the remarkable stability of elastin, radiolabel incorporated into the elastic laminae during early stages of aortic development can be identified in the mature vessel. Light microscopic autoradiographs of aortae from mice injected with radiolabeled valine at 3, 14, or 21 days of postnatal age and sacrificed at 4 months of age showed silver grains evenly distributed around the circumference of the vessel, suggesting uniform elastic lamina growth. Electron microscopic autoradiographs of aortae from mice injected at 3 and 14 days' postnatal age and killed at 4 months of age showed the elastin initially deposited at 3 days to be in the center of the lamina, whereas the elastin deposited at 14 days remained peripherally located. These observations suggest that elastin deposited early in development does not undergo any significant redistribution during growth of the vessel. Because the aorta continues to increase in diameter after the elastic laminae are essentially complete, the fenestrations in the laminae were investigated as possible sites of further expansion of the laminae. In aortae from mice injected at 3 days and sacrificed at 4 days of postnatal age, the edges of the elastic lamina that border on fenestrations showed a large number of silver grains. Regions of the elastic lamina at some distance from the fenestration, however, appeared to be associated with fewer grains. Results from this study not only present unique observations of elastin deposition in developing elastic laminae but also provide evidence that the fenestrations in the elastic laminae may play a role in their continued expansion during later stages of aortic development.
The dogma that cutaneous wound healing is impaired as a function of age is largely unsubstantiated. This can be attributed to poor experimental design of human studies, the lack of subject characterisation with the exclusion of disease processes, and the study of inappropriate animal models. Structural and functional changes in skin with age have been reported, such as a decrease in dermal thickness, decline in collagen content, a subtle alteration in the glycosaminoglycan profile, and a loss of elasticity, but these reports are subject to the above criticisms in addition to the often-neglected requirement for site specificity. Wound repair can be thought of as a culmination of three major overlapping phases: inflammation, proliferation and remodelling. The inflammatory process has not been studied systematically with respect to age, and despite a reported decline in cellular function and number, there is a confounding increase in the production of specific cytokines involved in the process of repair. The proliferative phase is associated with a loss of cellular responsiveness to specific cytokines with a decline in motility and proliferation; however caution in interpreting these findings is important as, for example, the definition of 'ageing' is used rather loosely with the result that neonatal versus young adult cells are compared instead of young versus old adults. During remodelling, fibronectin and collagen production may increase with age, as may wound contraction; the deposition of elastin has not been assessed and the resulting mechanical properties of the scar are controversial, not least because human in vivo studies have been ignored. The absence of a critical review on the effects of advancing age on wound healing has conspired to permit the perpetuation of the belief that well defined tenets exist. This review aims to redress this imbalance and to highlight the need for well designed research into an increasingly important field.
Department of Pathology, Auckland University School of Medicine, New Zealand.
Lung tissue from subjects dying from primary plexogenic pulmonary hypertension (PPH) has shown defects of elastin formation of the lung arteries. Lung vessels from 5 cases of PPH were compared with those of 9 age-matched normal subjects, and 24 individuals having secondary pulmonary hypertension (2 degrees PH). PPH cases and those with 2 degrees PH due to congenital heart disease with left-to-right shunts (2 degrees PH, LRS), showed active proliferation of medial smooth muscle cells (SMC) through defects of the internal elastic lamina (IEL) into the arterial lumen to form typical plexiform lesions. Larger arteries showed accelerated intimal thickening similar to normal aging. Plexiform lesions were not seen in normal subjects or in those developing high pulmonary pressures later in life. The observations showed that the development of discontinuities of the IEL of the pulmonary arteries and intimal thickening is accelerated in normal subjects by high pulmonary artery pressure, especially when this is established at a very young age. They suggest that such discontinuities occur in PPH due to inherent abnormality of the elastin of the arterial walls, with advanced early proliferation of medial SMC and obstruction of the pulmonary arterial circulation.
[Arterial ageing of aorta and atherosclerosis--with special reference to elastin].
Ageing of the arterial wall is defined as the age-related structural and functional changes in arteries. These changes include distension of the lumen, kinking of the artery, and rigidity of the arterial wall. Distension of the arterial luminal diameter with hardening of the arterial wall causes chronic ischemia in peripheral tissues, leading to age-related deterioration of the organs. The ensuing pathological modification in blood circulation is mainly linked to the decrease in the elastic recoil of the arteries and to the increasing difficulty of pumping systolic blood volume towards the periphery. This results in increased systolic blood pressure in the elderly and an increasing load on the ageing heart. Age-related changes in elastic arteries are characterized as degenerative changes in the SMCs of the media associated with depositions of collagen fibers and the fragmentation of elastic fibers. Data obtained from in vivo experiments indicate that the susceptibility of aged arteries to atherogenic stimuli might be related to intrinsic cellular changes with age. Substances that can regulate the function of vascular wall cells may be continuously present in the vessel walls, perhaps as components of super-extracellular matrix complexes. One type of substance is the functional domain structure of extracellular matrix molecules exposed to specific receptors or binding proteins on the surface of the cells. The role of extracellular matrices, especially elastin, on cultured vascular cells has been discussed.
Aged, 80 and over
J-STAGE, Japan Science and Technology Information Aggregator, Electronic
[Pulse wave and arterial elastic property--the principle and the essence of pulse wave velocity method (author's transl)].
Intrinsic aging vs. photoaging: a comparative histopathological, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study of skin.
Cutaneous aging is a complex biological phenomenon affecting the different constituents of the skin. To compare the effects of intrinsic and extrinsic aging processes, a total of 83 biopsies were collected from sun-exposed and protected skin of healthy volunteers representing decades from the 1st to the 9th (6-84 years of age). Routine histopathology coupled with computer-assisted image analysis was used to assess epidermal changes. Immunoperoxidase techniques with antibodies against type I and type III collagens and elastin were used to quantitatively evaluate changes in collagen and elastic fibers and their ultrastructure was examined by transmission electron microscopy. Epidermal thickness was found to be constant in different decades in both sun-exposed and protected skin; however, it was significantly greater in sun-exposed skin (P = 0.0001). In protected skin, type I and III collagen staining was altered only after the 8th decade, while in sun-exposed skin the relative staining intensity significantly decreased from 82.5% and 80.4% in the 1st decade to 53.2% and 44.1% in the 9th decade, respectively (P = 0.0004 and 0.0008). In facial skin the collagen fiber architecture appeared disorganized after the 4th decade. The staining intensity of elastin in protected skin significantly decreased from 49.2% in the 1st decade to 30.4% in the 9th decade (P = 0.05), whereas in sun-exposed skin the intensity gradually increased from 56.5% in the 1st decade to 75.2% in the 9th decade (P = 0.001). The accumulated elastin in facial skin was morphologically abnormal and appeared to occupy the areas of lost collagen. Collectively, the aging processes, whether intrinsic or extrinsic, have both quantitative and qualitative effects on collagen and elastic fibers in the skin.
Aged, 80 and over
Differential expression of the versican and decorin genes in photoaged and sun-protected skin. Comparison by immunohistochemical and northern analyses.
Chronic sun exposure induces numerous changes in exposed skin; the most striking histopathologic change is the massive accumulation of material with the staining characteristics of elastin, termed solar elastosis, in the superficial dermis. Previous studies have identified elastic fibers within areas of solar elastosis, as well as a decrease in collagen content. Recently, the large chondroitin sulfate (CS) proteoglycan, versican, has been identified in the dermis in association with elastic fibers, and the smaller CS proteoglycan, decorin, has been shown to codistribute with collagen fibers. Thus, changes in expression of these CS proteoglycans might be expected in photoaging and may help to explain the clinical alterations of chronically sun-exposed skin.
Immunohistochemical staining and confocal laser scanning microscopy for versican and decorin was performed on paired tissue samples from photoaged and non-sun-exposed skin taken from the same individuals. To investigate versican and decorin mRNA expression, Northern analysis was performed on paired fibroblast cultures derived from tissue explants of photoaged and non-sun-exposed skin.
Immunohistochemical staining and confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed a massive accumulation of versican localized to the abnormally large fibers comprising solar elastosis in the superficial and mid-dermis of photoaged specimens. Decorin staining was greatly decreased within the area of solar elastosis. Similarly, changes in mRNA were measured from fibroblast cultures, with a significant increase in versican mRNA in cultures derived from photoaged skin, whereas decorin mRNA levels were significantly decreased in photoaged skin.
This study provides further evidence for the close association of versican with elastic fibers and decorin with collagen fibers, even in the situation of abnormal fiber deposition occurring in photodamaged skin. In addition, changes in versican and decorin immunostaining are accompanied by similar alterations in gene expression.
[Molecular and hormonal changes during experimental prolongation of life].
Adrenal Glands/cytology
Pituitary Gland, Anterior/cytology
Thymus Gland/cytology
Thyroid Gland/physiology
To assess the mechanisms controlling the developmental regulation of tropoelastin expression in vivo, we developed a reverse-transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay to detect tropoelastin pre-mRNA as an indicator of ongoing transcription in intact tissue. RNA was isolated from mid-fetal (early-elastogenic), neonatal (peak tropoelastin expression), and adult (very low tropoelastin expression) rat lungs and reverse transcribed, and the cDNA was amplified with intron specific primers. A weak hybridization signal for tropoelastin pre-mRNA was seen in mid-fetal samples, and paralleling the increase in steady-state mRNA levels, a strong signal for pre-mRNA was detected in neonatal samples, indicating transcriptional regulation. Stimulation of fetal lung tropoelastin expression by maternal administration of dexamethasone also led to an increase in pre-mRNA levels. However, signal for tropoelastin pre-mRNA in adult samples was equal to that detected in neonatal samples, even though mRNA levels had dropped about 80-fold. Persistence of tropoelastin transcription in adult tissue was also seen in cell culture models and was verified by nuclear runoff assay. In addition, an RT-PCR assay for alpha 1 (I) procollagen pre-mRNA accurately revealed the known transcriptional regulation of this gene. Our results demonstrate that the induction and maintenance of elastogenesis is controlled by a transcriptional mechanism, whereas, the cessation of tropoelastin expression is controlled by a post-transcriptional mechanism.
Experimental photoaging in C3H/HeN, C3H/HeJ, and Balb/c mice: comparison of changes in extracellular matrix components and mast cell numbers.
Chronic exposure of human or murine skin to ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation alters dermal extracellular matrix composition and increases the number of mast cells and inflammatory cells. Experiments were designed to test the possible role of UVB-induced tumor necrosis factor-alpha in these photoaging changes based on reports that C3H/HeN, but not C3H/HeJ or Balb/c mice, produce excess TNF-alpha in response to UVB exposure. Pigmented C3H/HeN and C3H/HeJ strains were exposed to a total of 75 J/cm2 of UVB radiation, and unpigmented Balb/c mice were exposed to 19 J/cm2. The UVB-induced increases in collagen, glycosaminoglycans, and neutrophil number were similar or the same in all three strains. The elastin increase was greater in C3H/HeJ than in C3H/HeN mice. The most striking difference between the strains was a 7.7-fold UVB-induced increase in mast cells in C3H/HeN mice compared to no increase in irradiated C3H/HeJ mice and a 2.3-fold increase in Balb/c mice. These results suggest that excess TNF-alpha (or other mediator) produced in C3H/HeN skin (but not C3H/HeJ skin) in response to UVB exposure is involved in the mast cell increase and partial inhibition of elastin increase, but that neither these mediators nor mast cell products are important mediators for the chronic UVB-induced increases in neutrophils, glycosaminoglycans, and collagen. When a possible source of the excess TNF-alpha was investigated, it was found that isolated epidermal cells from all three strains produced increases in TNF-alpha in response to UVB radiation. These results, as well as the previous results showing differences between these strains in UVB-induced effects on cutaneous immune function, are consistent with a model in which UVB-induced mediators from the epidermis stimulate another cell type to produce excess TNF-alpha (and other mediators) in the C3H/HeN but not C3H/HeJ or Balb/c mice.
Iffland R
The Ca/Mg ratio in fibrous connective tissue may be related to its elastic property. Ligamenta flava were obtained from 76 patients during lumbar disc surgery, and Ca and Mg levels were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry. The Ca/Mg ratio was almost constant throughout all age groups. It is concluded that the constancy of the Ca/Mg ratio throughout the lifetime is an integral quality of elastic fibers which may be explained by the biological long half-life of elastin.
[New viewpoints on the development, maturation, and aging of cataneous connective tissue].
The clinical theoretical findings on skin connective tissue during the three periods of life result in new aspects of reaction possibilities of the skin under physiological and pathological conditions. The level of replication and production metabolism of skin connective tissue is high during development, maturation and ageing. Proteoglycans or glycosaminoglycans and collagen of skin connective tissue show remarkable turnover rates, during the three life periods, aging included. The interactions between these structure macromolecules and their microheterogeneity are regarded, beside elastin and denaturated collagen and their relationships. Finally the synthesis of proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans and of collagen as well as the several influences on the several synthesis steps are shown. Therewith we receive new aspects for the therapy of skin diseases.
Extracellular matrix modifications in rat tissues of different ages. Correlations between elastin and collagen type I mRNA expression and lysyl-oxidase activity.
We used a rat model to correlate age, matrix gene expression and lysyl oxidase activity in three connective tissues, skin, aorta and lung. By in situ hybridization, we showed that intense collagen type I and elastin mRNA expression were limited to a brief postnatal period. Although there were some organ-specific differences, the mRNA abundance for these two scleroproteins drastically diminished with time. Thus, the majority of mesenchymal cells in young (60 days) and old (720 days) animals, appeared to be in a quiescent state, consistent with the slow turnover of these two scleroproteins. We also measured the activity of lysyl oxidase, an enzyme which plays a crucial role in the formation of crosslinks in both procollagen and tropoelastin molecules. In all the organs investigated, we observed a tissue-dependent pattern of activity. Moreover in this study we focused on the importance of gene matrix expression in evaluating lysyl oxidase activity of aging tissues.
The renin-angiotensin system and volume overload-induced changes in cardiac collagen and elastin.
Besides cardiac load, the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) and aldosterone may regulate collagen accumulation during maturation or hypertrophic growth. The effect of cardiac volume overload on both left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV) collagen and elastin and the possible role of the RAS in such changes have not yet been assessed.
In the present study we assessed (1) the effects of 4 to 10 weeks of volume overload by an aortocaval shunt or minoxidil on LV and RV collagen and elastin and (2) the potential of the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor enalapril and the angiotensin II receptor blocker losartan to prevent and regress volume overload-induced changes in cardiac collagen and elastin. Cardiac volume overload by aortocaval shunt or minoxidil treatment decreased LV collagen accumulation as compared with control rats. In contrast, RV collagen accumulation was potentiated during the initial weeks but not during chronic aortocaval shunt. Enalapril and losartan prevented the relative decreases in LV collagen content and concentration induced by a shunt. Losartan also reversed the decrease in LV collagen content by aortocaval shunt. Neither blocker significantly affected the enhanced RV collagen accumulation during the initial weeks of shunt, but both blockers further potentiated RV collagen accumulation during chronic volume overload. Aortocaval shunt for 4 weeks but not 10 weeks enhanced LV and RV elastin accumulation. This initial increase in LV and RV elastin content was blocked by both enalapril and losartan.
Cardiac volume overload, even when accompanied by increased plasma renin activity, decreases LV collagen accumulation, suggesting that in contrast to the stimulatory effect of systolic wall stress, increased diastolic wall stress inhibits collagen accumulation. In support of this concept, enalapril and losartan decreased LV preload and maintained LV collagen accumulation. In contrast to LV collagen, RV collagen accumulation was potentiated during the initial weeks of volume overload, possibly related to acute RV pressure overload shortly after aortocaval shunt and its decrease with chronic shunt. Enalapril and losartan had minimal effect on the enhanced RV collagen during the initial weeks of aortocaval shunt but potentiated RV collagen during chronic shunt, possibly by decreasing RV diastolic pressures. Altogether, these data suggest that during cardiac volume overload, the RAS affects cardiac collagen primarily by its hemodynamic effects. The RAS, however, may potentiate RV and LV elastin accumulation during the initial weeks of volume overload since both enalapril and losartan block this increase.
Dalessandri KM
The Watanabe hereditary hyperlipidemic (WHHL) rabbit is an animal model that resembles humans with familial hyperlipidemia. In the thoracic aortae, there is also morphologic evidence of marked destruction of medial lamellar elastin fibers. Herein is provided the chemical evidence of elastolytic degradation. The levels of lysyl oxidase (L.Ox.), soluble elastin (SE) and insoluble elastin (IE) were estimated in thoracic aortae samples from New Zealand white (NZW) and WHHL rabbits at 6 months of age or 5 WHHL rabbits at 2.5 years of age. Enzyme-linked immunosorption assays (ELISA) were used in the L.Ox. and SE measurements. IE was measured following alkali extraction of aortae. There was a decrease in IE in thoracic aortae from Watanabe rabbits compared to NZW controls at 6 months of age (P &lt; 0.1), and a further loss of IE in aortae from 2.5-year-old WHHL rabbits relative to the values at 6 months (P &lt; 0.05). Average values for IE were: 130 mg/g for 6-month-old NZW, 100 mg/g for 6-month-old WHHL, and 60 mg/g for 2.5-year-old WHHL rabbits. Moreover, SE was only observed in aorta extracts from the older WHHL rabbits, a sign of elastolytic damage. There was also a five- to sixfold decrease in L.Ox. in the older vs. younger rabbits.
Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, Silesian Academy of Medicine, Sosnowiec, Poland.
Aged, 80 and over
Exposure of the newborn lung to hyperoxia is associated with impaired alveolar development. In newborn rats exposed to hyperoxia and studied at day 14 of life, retinoic acid (RA) treatment improved survival and increased lung collagen but did not improve alveolar development. To determine whether RA treatment during exposure to hyperoxia results in late improvement in alveolarization, we treated newborn rats with RA and hyperoxia from day 3 to day 14 and then weaned O2 to room air by day 20, and studied the animals on day 42. O2-exposed animals had larger mean lung volumes, larger alveoli, and decreased gas-exchange tissue relative to air-exposed animals, whereas RA-treated O2-exposed animals were not statistically different from air-exposed controls. Relative to control animals, elastin staining at day 14 was decreased in hyperoxia-exposed lung independent of RA treatment, and, at day 42, elastin staining was similar in all treatment groups. At day 14, elastin gene expression was similar in all treatment groups, whereas at day 42 lung previously exposed to hyperoxia showed increased elastin signal independent of RA treatment. These results indicate that RA treatment during hyperoxia exposure promotes septal formation without evidence of effects on elastin gene expression after 4 wk of recovery.
Tissue-specific and developmentally regulated expression of human elastin promoter activity in transgenic mice.
We have recently cloned the entire human elastin gene, including approximately 5.2 kilobases of the 5'-flanking sequences. To examine tissue-specific expression of the elastin gene, we have developed a transgenic mouse line that expresses the human elastin promoter linked to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene. Assay of CAT activity in different tissues revealed the highest expression in the lungs and aorta, while lower levels were detected in the kidneys, heart, brain, and skin; this distribution parallels the accumulation of elastin in developing animals. Comparison of CAT activity in the lungs of fetal (15-day gestation) and newborn (5-day postnatal) animals revealed significantly (approximately 4-fold) higher activity in the fetal tissue. The relatively high activity in the lungs progressively declined during the postnatal period up to 6 months. The promoter activity in the aorta remained constant from 5 days to 3 months and then gradually declined, while in the skin, the activity peaked at 3 months, returning thereafter to the control (5-day) level. Thus, there is evidence for developmentally regulated, tissue-specific expression of the elastin promoter in vivo as tested in these transgenic mice.
Enhanced elastin and fibrillin gene expression in chronically photodamaged skin.
Cutaneous aging consists of chronologic aging as well as actinic damage, referred to as photoaging. Most of the morphologic changes associated with an aged appearance result from actinic damage to the skin. The morphologic changes in sun-damaged skin are associated with accumulation of material having the staining characteristics of elastin, known as solar elastosis, in the superficial dermis. Previous studies have demonstrated the presence of elastin within areas of solar elastosis; however, little is known about the mechanisms leading to elastin accumulation in photoaged skin. In addition, fibrillin, the fibrillar component of elastic fibers, has been found in small amounts in solar elastosis. In this study we demonstrate increased elastin mRNA levels in photoaged skin, as well as increased elastin and fibrillin mRNAs in skin explant-derived fibroblasts using Northern hybridizations, compared with controls from sun-protected sites of the same individual. Increased elastin mRNA levels result from transcriptional upregulation of the gene, as demonstrated by transient transfections with a human elastin promoter/chloramphenicol acetyltransferase construct. Elevated mRNA levels were also correlated with increased elastin and fibrillin deposition in paired biopsy specimens from photodamaged and non-sun-exposed skin, as demonstrated by immunohistochemical staining. Thus, approaches to counteract transcriptional activation of elastin gene expression may be useful in preventing the changes associated with cutaneous photoaging.
Aging of the skin connective tissue: how to measure the biochemical and mechanical properties of aging dermis.
Department of Dermatology, University of Oulu, Finland.
The connective tissue of the skin is composed mostly of collagen and elastin. Collagen makes up 70-80% of the dry weight of the skin and gives the dermis its mechanical and structural integrity. Elastin is a minor component of the dermis, but it has an important function in providing the elasticity of the skin. During aging, the synthesis of collagen gradually declines, and the skin thus becomes thinner in protected skin, especially after the seventh decade. Several factors contribute to the aging of the skin. In several hereditary disorders collagen or elastin are deficient, leading to accelerated aging. In cutis laxa, for example, elastin fibers are deficient or completely lacking, leading to sagging of the skin. Solar irradiation causes skin to look prematurely aged. Especially ultraviolet radiation induces an accumulation of abnormal elastotic material. These changes are usually observed after 60 years of age, but excessive exposure to the sun may cause severe photoaging as early as the second decade of life. The different biochemical and mechanical parameters of the dermis can be studied by modern techniques. The applications of these techniques to study the aging of dermal connective tissue are described in detail.
The consequences of hypertension and aging on cardiovascular structure and function are reputed to be similar, suggesting that blood pressure plays a role in the aging process. However, the exact relationship between aging, blood pressure, and the arterial structure-function relationship has not been demonstrated. To test the effects of aging, renin-angiotensin system, and pressure on the arterial wall, 20 normotensive male WAG/Rij rats were killed at 6, 12, 24, and 30 mo of age and compared with similar groups treated with an angiotensin (ANG)-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI), perindopril. Arterial function was determined by a systemic hemodynamic study and by in situ measurement of carotid compliance. Arterial wall structure was determined by histomorphometric and biochemical methods. Aging did not significantly modify blood pressure, but ACE inhibition decreased blood pressure significantly from 6 to 30 mo. Plasma renin activity decreased with age and increased with ACEI. Plasma atrial natriuretic factor increased with age and was significantly decreased with ACEI. Absolute and relative left ventricular weight increased with age, and ACEI delayed these increases. Arterial wall stiffness increased with age, as shown by a significant decrease in systemic and local arterial compliance and by an increase in aortic characteristic impedance. The increase in carotid wall compliance after poisoning of smooth muscle contractile function (KCN) was greater in young (6- and 12-mo old) than in old (24- and 30-mo old) rats. Chronic ACEI treatment increased basal carotid compliance values slightly and did not change KCN carotid compliance. The aortic and carotid luminal size increased regularly with age. Aging was associated without any change in absolute elastin content. In contrast, collagen content increased with aging. Aging was also associated with an increase in medial thickness. Medial thickening was mainly due to smooth muscle hypertrophy. Aging was associated with intimal proliferation, which became progressively thicker and collagen rich. ACEI treatment did not prevent aortic lumen enlargement but significantly postponed the increase in medial and intimal thickening. Biochemical determinations of the aortic wall components confirmed the morphometric data. In conclusion, the age-dependent large artery enlargement and stiffening were observed both in normotensive rats and in those rats whose blood pressure was lowered by ACEI. This suggests that aging and blood pressure affect arterial wall structure and function by different mechanisms.
The normal development of elastin fibers in the thoracic aorta was studied in fetal, young, and adult monkeys. Tissue was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) after NaOH treatment and by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The NaOH treatment of fixed tissues effectively removed collagen fibers and enabled three-dimensional visualization of the elastin fibers. In intact fetal aortae, the internal elastic lamina (IEL) was situated immediately beneath the endothelium. This IEL consisted of superficial, longitudinally arranged bundles of elastin fibrils and an underlying solid sheet containing round fenestrations. In neonates, diffuse intimal thickening was observed. In the young and young-adult monkeys, the aortae exhibited intimal thickening with slender but split IEL. One of the most important findings of this study was that elastin fibers in the intimal thickening, as well as smooth muscle cells, ran in a longitudinal fashion. This was in contrast with the elastic laminae of the media which were mainly oriented circumferentially. Subendothelial elastin fibers in this intimal thickening combined with longitudinally arranged microfibrils which formed close associations with endothelial stress fibers. In some adult monkey aortae with well-developed intimal thickening, a complex meshwork of slender elastin fibers was also found beneath the endothelium. The development of the intimal elastin fibers is discussed in relation to hemodynamic forces.
Division of Biochemistry, School of Biology and Biochemistry, Queen's University of Belfast, N. Ireland.
The rate of calcification within the human thoracic aorta from completion of body growth to advanced old age was examined. Fifty-eight aortae, obtained at necropsy, were dissected into four layers: the complete intima and the separated media, which was subdivided into three tissue samples of equal thickness, defined as the media-inner, -middle, and -outer layers. The sampling sites selected for analysis were from regions of the aortic surface that were free of atherosclerotic plaques. The calcium content within each tissue layer of the aorta was determined. Arterial wall thickness and the cholesterol content of the four layers were also measured. Intimal calcification increased progressively during aging: from 1.6 micrograms Ca/mg tissue at 20 years of age to 5.2 micrograms Ca/mg tissue by 90 years of age. When intima calcium concentration was expressed by tissue volume (w/v), no significant change during aging was found. Medial calcification, as w/v and by w/w, increased throughout aging. Calcium accumulation was most marked in the middle, elastin-rich layer of the media, increasing from 1.4 micrograms Ca/mg tissue at 20 years of age to 49.50 micrograms Ca/mg tissue by 90 years of age. Calcium levels also increased in the other media layers, but at a slower rate than that found within the middle media.
Aged, 80 and over
Department of Pathology, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Medicine, Kitakyushu, Japan.
It is known that extracellular matrix-degrading enzymes play an important role in tissue remodeling and that large amounts of structural proteins including types I, III, IV, and V collagens and elastin are produced by smooth muscle cells (SMC) in the arterial wall. We have recently shown that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) produced by human aortic medial smooth muscle cells are closely related to the proliferation of the cells, leading to the formation of atherosclerotic plaques, characteristic of intimal remodeling. For a better understanding of the mechanism of atherogenesis, therefore, it is important to clarify the relationship between the production of matrix-degrading enzymes and artery development.
In vivo or in vitro synthesis of MMPs by SMC was analyzed by immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting. Elastase activity in the culture medium was also estimated.
Production of proMMP 1, 2, and 3 was detected in cultured SMC isolated from the aortas of both neonates and fetuses; in medial SMC cultured from young individuals, production of proMMP-1 and -3 was extremely decreased, but was apparent in intimal SMC. Immunohistochemical observation indicated that in the media of fetal or neonatal aorta, SMC synthesized large amounts of the three proMMPs; in aortas from older individuals, proMMP-2, but not proMMP-1 and -3, was detected in the media, and relatively large amounts of proMMP-1, -2, and -3 were produced by SMC in the slightly thickened intima. Assay of elastase activity in the culture medium gave results similar to those for MMPs.
We conclude that the production of proMMP-1 and -3 is associated with phenotypic modulation of SMC to a "synthetic" state, and that the ability of SMC to produce MMPs plays an important role in the development and/or aging of the human aorta through remodeling of the extracellular matrix; furthermore elastase is also involved in these processes in the arterial wall.
Along its length, the rabbit flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) tendon exhibits two functionally specialized regions: classical tendon (CT) and fibrocartilage (FC). We examined their development in rabbits, ranging in age from newborn to nine-months postnatal, using a combination of light microscopic, immunohistochemical and biochemical techniques. There is little histodifferentiation in newborn tendon. Both regions are composed of thin collagenous fibers, numerous fibroblast-like cells and a low molecular weight dermatan-sulfate proteoglycan. Regional specialization has begun by two-weeks postnatal and by three-months postnatal, FC regions have been transformed into a true fibrocartilage characterized by a complex collagenous and elastic fiber network, numerous chondrocytes and a matrix rich in a high molecular weight predominantly chondroitin-sulfate proteoglycan and type II collagen. These features are elaborated between three and nine-months postnatal. CT regions undergo little substantial change during growth and maturation. The rabbit is born altricial and incapable of adult patterns of locomotion. We propose that the developmental expression of functional specializations within the FDP tendon is closely linked with the onset of different physical demands arising from the adoption of adult patterns of locomotion.
Data on composition and structure of extracellular matrix (ECM) of different tissues and at different developmental stages are summarized. ECM secreted by cells is a complex supermolecular structure formed of polymerized collagen, elastin, proteoglycans, and structural glycoproteins. Its organization varies depending on tissue type or on location within the same tissue. Variation of ECM composition is determined by qualitative and quantitative differences in combination of its constituent components, as well as by microheterogeneity of these components. Permanent feed-back exists between cells and ECM. Morphological and functional relationships are established between basal membranes, ECM, pericellular matrix, and cytoskeleton. An important role in these relationships belongs to integrins, a family of transmembrane proteins specifically interacting with ECM components. ECM composition specifically changes during development and regeneration, correlating with differentiation and morphogenesis of corresponding tissues. Thus, ECM has a complex structure, is responsible, to a certain extent, for tissue specificity and for stage-specific differences between tissues, and can be regarded as a probable position information carrier, both in embryos and adult animals.
The relationship between facial wrinkling and airflow obstruction.
Similar smoking-related changes in the collagen and elastin could play a role in the pathogenesis of both skin wrinkling and chronic airflow obstruction. The hypothesis was tested by analyzing whether increased facial wrinkling, especially in smokers, is associated with the presence of airflow obstruction.
An age-stratified randomized sample of the general population comprising 6034 men and 7152 women between 30 and 80 years of age was analyzed. The recording of wrinkling in the crow's foot area of the right eye was performed according to an earlier described severity score. As an index of airflow obstruction, we used the ratio between forced expiratory volume in 1 s and forced vital capacity in percent (FEV1/FVC%).
Multiple regression analysis comprising current and previous smokers showed that, after controlling for age, subjects with highest wrinkle scores had on average FEV1/FVC% that was 1.2-1.9% lower than in subjects with lower wrinkle scores. No association between facial wrinkling and airflow obstruction was observed among lifetime nonsmokers.
Aged, 80 and over
[Connective tissue and aging. (1) Changes of intracellular matrix by age].
J-STAGE, Japan Science and Technology Information Aggregator, Electronic
The cardiac interstitium is populated by nonmyocyte cell types including transcriptionally active cardiac fibroblasts and endothelial cells. Since these cells are the source of many components of the cardiac extracellular matrix, and because changes in cardiac extracellular matrix are suspected of contributing to the genesis of cardiovascular complications in disease states such as diabetes, hypertension, cardiac hypertrophy and congestive heart failure, interest in the mechanisms of activation of fibroblasts and endothelial cells has led to progress in understanding these processes. Recent work provides evidence for the role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in the pathogenesis of abnormal deposition of extracellular matrix in the cardiac interstitium during the development of inappropriate cardiac hypertrophy and failure. The cardiac extracellular matrix is also known to change in response to altered cardiac performance associated with post-natal aging, and in response to environmental stimuli including intermittent hypoxia and abnormal nutrition. It is becoming clear that the extracellular matrix mainly consists of molecules of collagen types I and III; they form fibrils and provide most of the connective material for typing together myocytes and other structures in the myocardium and thus is involved in the transmission of developed mechanical force. The data available in the literature support the view that the extracellular matrix is a dynamic entity and alterations in this structure result in the development of heart dysfunction.
Detrimental effects of the natural aging process on the human cricoarytenoid joint have been hypothesized as a possible etiology for the voice changes seen in the aging population. Cellular events occurring at the histologic level, such as cricoarytenoid joint erosion or arthritis may lead to alterations in laryngeal structure which ultimately affect its function and performance. Seven normal human larynges of varying ages ranging from 29 to 69 years of age were examined histopathologically for changes in the cricoarytenoid joint. The synovium, joint space, periarticular muscle, and respiratory epithelium were evaluated for the presence of inflammatory changes or edema and degree of vascularity. The location and amount of ossification, elastin, and collagen formation were also noted. There were no appreciable changes noted in the synovium or joint space itself with increasing age. No differences were observed in the degree of elastin or collagen formation. However, there was progressive cricoid and arytenoid ossification and periarticular muscular atrophy and fibrosis. These findings suggest that other laryngeal changes may play a greater role in determining senescent vocal quality rather than changes within the cricoarytenoid joint itself.
Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106.
These studies were undertaken to determine whether tropoelastin message expression in lung parenchymal tissue is altered in rats reared in an hyperoxic environment during the period of time that alveolar septation normally occurs. Rat pups were exposed to &gt; 95% oxygen from days 4 to 14 and killed during the exposure and recovery periods. Results of in situ hybridizations indicated a delay in peak tropoelastin (TE) message levels in oxygen-exposed rats vs. controls, day 16 vs. day 11, respectively. In addition, lung parenchymal TE mRNA levels in the oxygen-exposed pups remained elevated through day 23, 1 wk after TE mRNA levels had decreased in controls. These observations suggest that the regulatory control of elastin synthesis during lung alveolar septation is altered by hyperoxic exposure. In a separate experiment, rat pups were exposed to &gt; 95% oxygen during the period of alveolarization and followed for 4 wk postexposure. Pulmonary function measurements were conducted to determine whether lung function was altered postexposure and, if so, whether recovery occurred. We also used stereological techniques to quantitate the total length of lung parenchymal elastic fibers to determine whether elastic fiber content in the oxygen-exposed pups was restored to normal levels during the month postexposure. Although the total length of elastic fibers in lung parenchyma was found to be greater in oxygen-exposed than control pups from postnatal days 22 to 41, pressure-volume curves indicated that lungs of the oxygen-exposed pups tended to be more compliant than controls, suggesting that abnormal elastic fiber assembly might have been a contributing factor.
Relative efficiency of incorporation of newly synthesized elastin and collagen into aorta, pulmonary artery and pulmonary vein of growing pigs.
It is generally accepted that, once laid down in the extracellular matrix, elastin turns over only very slowly if at all. However, much of the evidence for minimal turnover of elastin comes from aortic tissue. In this study we have compared the relative synthesis rates of elastin and collagen with their relative accumulation rates in segments of aorta (AO), pulmonary artery (PA), and pulmonary vein (PV) of young, growing pigs. While rates of elastin synthesis are comparable in the AO and PA, the PA accumulates only 33% of the elastin deposited in the AO. Similarly, while the rate of elastin synthesis in the PV is 60% of that in the AO, accumulation of elastin is only 20% of that in the AO. Similar discrepancies between collagen synthesis and accumulation were seen among these three vessels. These data suggest that, at least in growing animals, the efficiency of permanent incorporation of elastin and collagen into the extracellular matrix may be an important factor in determining the final contents of these connective tissue proteins in vascular tissues.
Elastic lamina growth during development and the ultimate stability of elastin in the mouse aortic media was investigated by light and electron microscopic radioautography. Following a single subcutaneous injection of L-[3,4-3H]valine at 3 days of age, animals were killed at 9 subsequent time intervals up to 4 months of age. One day after injection, radioautographic silver grains were primarily observed over the elastic laminae; however, silver grains were also seen over the smooth muscle cells and extracellular matrix. By 21 to 28 days of age, the silver grains were almost exclusively located over the elastic laminae. From 28 days to 4 months of age, the distribution of silver grains appeared relatively unchanged. Quantitation of silver grain number/micron2 of elastin showed a steady decrease in the concentration of silver grains associated with the elastic laminae from 4 to 21 days of age. After this time, no significant difference in silver grain concentration was observed. Since the initial decrease in grains/micron2 of elastin corresponds to a period of rapid post-natal growth, the decrease is likely to be a result of dilution of the radiolabel due to new elastin synthesis. With the assumption that little or no significant turnover occurs during this time, a constant growth rate of 4.3% per day was predicted by linear regression analysis. Since no significant difference in the concentration of silver grains was observed from 28 to 118 days of age, no new growth or turnover of elastin can be said to occur during this time period. This is supported by the observation that animals injected with radiolabeled valine at 28 days and 8 months of age showed no significant incorporation of radiolabel into the elastic laminae. The results from this study present the first long-term radioautographic evidence of the stability of aortic elastin and emphasize that initial deposition of elastin and proper assembly of elastic laminae is a critical event in vessel development.
Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-2561.
Elastin and type IV collagen production are markedly elevated in fibroblasts derived from the skin of patients with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria (HGP). Fibroblasts from three affected children and their parents were compared to normal human skin fibroblasts with respect to elastin production as a function of different concentrations of calf serum and the cytokines, transforming growth factor-beta and basic fibroblast growth factor (TGF-beta 1, bFGF). In cultured fibroblasts from the parents of probands that were very high elastin producers (&gt; 10(5) molecular equivalents/cell per h), at least one parent (mother) presented the same phenotype. Overproduction of elastin in culture could have been due to increased sensitivity of HGP strains to stimuli present in serum; however, relative stimulation of elastin production by calf serum in cell strains from HGP elastin over-producers was less than half the control strain. In most of the cultures examined, the responsiveness of elastin production to TGF-beta 1 was almost absent when compared to the response of normal fibroblasts. HGP strains with high elastin production modified conditioned medium to enhance elastin production in normal cells. These results suggest the presence, in HGP skin fibroblasts, of inheritance of high elastin production that is associated with accelerated aging.
Elastin VIII. A correlative study of the aging elastica of arteries and skin.
Nigrosin base in an acid alcohol solution and Gomori's aldehyde fuchsin gave excellent staining of the elastic fibers in the arteries and skin regardless of age. Neutral hydroalcohol solutions of alcohol soluble nigrosin stained the elastic fibers in the arteries and skin of humans above age 20. Clara's neutral hematoxylin stained the arterial elastica of children less than 10 years of age, but did not color the elastic fibers of the skin. By these staining procedures, it may be possible to obtain information about arterial elastica by a skin biopsy.
Staining and Labeling
The histologic changes that occur in the media of the normal aorta at various ages were studied in 100 normal aortas. These changes encompassed (1) cystic medial necrosis, defined as pooling of mucoid material; (2) elastin fragmentation, characterized by disruption of elastin lamellae; (3) fibrosis, defined as an increase in collagen at the expense of smooth muscle cells; and (4) medionecrosis, defined as areas with apparent loss of nuclei. The changes showed a striking correlation with age and may represent the normal aging process for the aorta as determined histologically. The alterations showed a close relation in onset and location within the media, suggesting a phenomenon if injury and repair caused by hemodynamic events. These findings in the normal aging aorta reveal that none of the histologic changes observed can be regarded as the specific structural alteration responsible for the development of dissecting aneurysm.
The morphology of the arteries in the uterine wall was studied in three multiparous aged mares that had suffered repeated pregnancy failure. The uterine wall arteries exhibited elastosis of the intima or adventitia, or both, resembling "physiological pregnancy sclerosis". In areas affected by elastosis, degeneration of the pre-existing elastic fibres and increased glycosaminoglycans were frequently observed. Newly formed elastic fibres were not evident. Delayed resorption due to disordered metabolic turnover of the elastin was thought to be an important factor in the pathogenesis of the arterial elastosis in the uterine wall.
The structural and functional intigration of smooth muscle cells and elastic laminae in the aortic media is not well established. Detailed information concerning normal ultrastructural features of the aortic media will provide a better understanding of the medial changes that occur in vascular diseases such as hypertension and aortic aneurysms.
The ultrastructural development and organization of connections between smooth muscle cells and elastic laminae in the mouse aortic media were studied by light and electron microscopy.
Early in development, the smooth muscle cells become linked to the elastic laminae by bundles of microfibrils. These microfibrils become progressively infiltrated with elastin so as to form extensions of elastin from the elastic laminae in the adult media. Each elastin extension spans obliquely from the elastic lamina to the surface of the smooth muscle cell where it attaches in a region of membrane occupied by an intracellular membrane-associated dense plaque. On the cytoplasmic face of the plaque, a contractile filament bundle penetrates and anchors in an orientation similar to that of the extracellular elastin extension. The contractile filament bundle traverses the cell obliquely and anchors in a dense plaque on the opposite side of the cell that is in turn linked to the next elastic lamina by another elastin extension. The extracellular elastin extensions and the intracellular contractile filament bundles thus form a "contractile-elastic unit," a continuous line of structures that links adjacent elastic laminae. The oblique orientation of the contractile-elastic units reverses direction in successive smooth muscle cell layers in a herringbone-like pattern. Thus, tension transmitted to one elastic lamina by the smooth muscle cells on either side results in a uniform force exerted on the elastic lamina in one circumferential direction, that on the adjacent elastic laminae being in the opposite direction.
Results from this study demonstrate the presence of smooth muscle cell to elastic lamina connections that form early in development as contractile-elastic units; basic units of aortic medial ultrastructure. The overall organization of the contractile-elastic units within the aortic media is proposed to provide a means for coordinating contractile and elastic tensions in response to mechanical stresses imposed on the vessel wall.
Embryonic and Fetal Development
There is substantial evidence that colonic diverticulosis is related to civilization, industrialization and a "Western" lifestyle and diet, being described as "a disease of Western civilization". Its increased incidence during the 20th century and the morbidity and mortality associated with complications, demand that this condition should receive greater attention in terms of aetiology, prevention and management. It is generally believed that low dietary fibre and ageing are the two main pathogenic factors involved in this disease. Physiological studies have also demonstrated that there is a higher intraluminal pressure in the large bowel with diverticula. This chapter provides the evidence currently available for the pathophysiology of colonic diverticulosis and discusses its aetiological factors, including low dietary fibre, ageing and intraluminal pressure as well as extracelluar matrix such as collagen and elastin. The difference between the left-sided diverticulosis commonly seen in Caucasians and the right-sided predominantly observed in Asians is also presented.
Diverticulosis and Diverticulitis - MedlinePlus Health Information
Effects of age and exercise training on size and composition of the rat left main coronary artery.
This study evaluated the effects of age and exercise training on the left main coronary artery (LMCA) in young (Y-5 months) and old (O-27.5 months) female Fischer 344 rats. Both age groups were divided into trained (T) and weight-matched sedentary (S) control groups. Training consisted of 10 weeks of treadmill running progressing to a maximum workload of 15% grade, 1 hr/day, 5 d/wk at speeds of 36 and 15 m/min for the Y and O rats, respectively. Aging resulted in a 40% increase in left ventricle (LV) weight which was proportional to the increased body weight of the old animals. Exercise training produced a mild (approximately 10%) but significant left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in both trained groups. Cross-sectional area of the LMCA lumen and wall, wall thickness, and areas of collagen (C), elastin (E), and collagen-to-elastin ratio (C/E) of the LMCA wall were determined morphometrically in all four groups. A method for pinpointing the coronary ostium for use as a reference point was also developed. LMCA lumen area almost doubled (p &lt; .001) across the measured age difference, but was unaffected by training. With aging, the increase in LMCA wall area bordered on significance (p &lt; .053), while wall thickness, C area, and the C/E ratio were unchanged. Our results indicate that there is a disproportionate increase in the cross-sectional area of the rat LMCA with respect to LV mass changes with aging. This finding presumably reflects adaptation of this vessel to elevated resistances further downstream in the coronary circulation so that tissue perfusion can be maintained.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Elastic properties of human aortas in relation to age and atherosclerosis: a structural model.
A new structural model is described for the tension-radius relationship of blood vessels, taking into account their mechanically important constituents: collagen, elastin and smooth muscle. The model has four characteristic parameters: EC, the Young's modulus of the collagen fibres; ESE, the Young's modulus of the combined smooth-muscle/elastin network; epsilon mu, the amount of strain at which the high stiffness region on the tension-radius curve is reached, and eta an indicator for the degree of collagen fibre stretching. The structural stiffness of the wall constituents is reflected by EC and ESE whereas the global stiffness of the entire blood vessel is described by epsilon mu and eta. All these elasticity parameters are pressure independent, in contrast to generally quoted values for the incremental modulus or vascular compliance which are strongly pressure dependent. Hence, an objective comparison of the mechanical properties for various types of blood vessel, based on the present model parameters, has been made possible. The model was successfully fitted to tension-radius data of 65 human aortas, age range 30-88 years, with moderate or severe atherosclerosis. The structural as well as the global stiffness changes with age, e.g. collagen stiffness shows a ninefold increase over 60 years. Global stiffness depends on atherosclerosis.
Aged, 80 and over
Molecular basis of sun-induced premature skin ageing and retinoid antagonism.
Damage to skin collagen and elastin (extracellular matrix) is the hallmark of long-term exposure to solar ultraviolet irradiation, and is believed to be responsible for the wrinkled appearance of sun-exposed skin. We report here that matrix-degrading metalloproteinase messenger RNAs, proteins and activities are induced in human skin in vivo within hours of exposure to ultraviolet-B irradiation (UVB). Induction of metalloproteinase proteins and activities occurred at UVB doses well below those that cause skin reddening. Within minutes, low-dose UVB upregulated the transcription factors AP-1 and NF-kappa B, which are known to be stimulators of metalloproteinase genes. All-trans retinoic acid, which transrepresses AP-1 (ref. 8), applied before irradiation with UVB, substantially reduced AP-1 and metalloproteinase induction. We propose that elevated metalloproteinases, resulting from activation of AP-1 and NF-kappa B by low-dose solar irradiation, degrade collagen and elastin in skin. Such damage, if imperfectly repaired, would result in solar scars, which through accumulation from a lifetime of repeated low-dose sunlight exposure could cause premature skin ageing (photoageing).
1B. Retinoic acid receptors - IUPHAR Database of Receptors and Ion Channels
An amino acid derived from aldol crosslink of elastin and collagen: structure, distribution, aging, and two models of hyperglycemia.
A novel amino acid named aldosine was isolated from acid hydrolysates of bovine aorta elastin. The mass spectral analysis of aldosine indicated a parent compound with a mass of 256 (C12H20N2O4). From the structure identified by spectroscopy of aldosine and its derivatives, it was deduced that aldosine was derived from aldol crosslink and dehydromerodesmosine of elastin and collagen. The aldosine content in aorta of newborn rats was very low, but increased markedly with growth. After maturity was reached, the aldosine content decreased. The aldosine content in bovine aorta decreased gradually from 7 months to 16 years of age. Aldosine was also quantified in the aorta and tail tendon of rats in two models of hyperglycemia: diabetes and galactosemia. Hyperglycemias were significantly affected on aldosine content of organs. In both diabetic and galactosemic animals, aldosine was remarkably lower relative to controls (about one-half and one-sixth, respectively).
Elastin fibres give blood vessels important rheological properties, such as the postsystolic elastic recoil. The age-dependent increase of Ca2+ and lipid content, and elastolytic degradation of the fibres progressively impairs their function and produces circulating elastin peptides. Their interaction with the elastin receptor on smooth muscle cells induces not only increased cell-elastin fibre adhesion and endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation but also the release of lytic enzymes and oxygen free radicals from monocytes penetrating the vascular wall during atherogenesis. The age-dependent 'uncoupling' of the receptor has been shown to be involved in the loss of Ca2+ homeostatic mechanisms and the progressive calcification of the vessel wall.
Elastase in the prevention of arterial aging and the treatment of atherosclerosis.
Arterial aging is defined as the age-related structural and functional changes in arteries from the precapillary to the aortic level. These include atheromatous changes. Such changes can be estimated in medium-sized or larger arteries by clinical diagnostic studies, including B-mode echography of the carotid artery (thickening of the intima, plaque formation and increase in luminal diameter) and abdominal aorta (plaque formation and increase in luminal diameter). Doppler echography (pulse wave velocity; PWV) and autopsy studies. These changes include distension of the lumen, increased arterial wall thickness (which may be associated with atherosclerotic plaques) and decreased extensibility of the arterial wall. Since 1981, an anti-atherosclerotic drug containing porcine pancreatic elastase 1 (PPE1) has been used for the prevention of arterial aging and the treatment of atherosclerosis in elderly patients in Japan. So far, the age-related increase in PWV has been found to be lower in those who take PPE1 than in controls. The atherosclerotic index of the carotid artery has also been found to be lower in subjects receiving PPE1 treatment than in control subjects. The pharmacological basis of PPE1 therapy, although paradoxical to the consensus opinion of the pathogenic role of elastase in western countries, is discussed with reference to data gathered in Japan. The pathomechanism of arterial aging and atherosclerosis, with special reference to elastin, is reviewed along with the presentation of some of our data.
[Changes in the amounts of elastic and collagenous elements of normal aged and emphysematous lung: use of a model of static pressure-volume relationships].
The possibility of a difference between the amount of elastic and collagenous connective tissues in normal and emphysematous lungs is controversial. I used an equation (MIN, 1995, reference 2) to compute the total amount of connective tissue in the pulmonary parenchyma from static pressure-volume relationships in 44 subjects divided into four groups. For normal nonsmokers, normal smokers, smokers with COPD, and subjects with emphysema, there was a unique relationship between the total, amount of connective tissues (sigma 0 = -0.82 Log(a) + 3.02 r2 = 0.201, p = 0.0029). Age was also significantly related to the modulus of elasticity: it appeared to increase 0.4% per year in nonsmokers and 5.4% per year in smokers with COPD. The ratio of collagen-to-elastin content in the lung parenchyma was taken to be 1.3 (from the results of recent studies), and little difference was found between normal smokers and emphysematous smokers in regard to collagen-elastin catabolism. In both groups the apparent yearly decrease in elastin content was about 1.6%, and the apparent yearly increase in collagen content was about 0.6%. Therefore, the damaging effects of emphysema on parenchymal connective tissues may be analogous to accelerated catabolism of parenchymal connective tissues in normal aging lungs.
Collagen, elastin and glycosaminoglycans in aortic aneurysms.
Department of Biochemistry, Medical Academy of Białystok, Poland.
The walls of human abdominal aortas and atherosclerosis-induced aneurysms contain similar amounts of collagen. The quantitative ratio between collagens of various types of this protein does not differ significantly either, whereas solubility of the collagen in aneurysmal wall and its susceptibility to the action of EDTA are distinctly decreased. In contrast with collagen, the amount of elastin in aneurysms is significantly lower. Total amount of glycosaminoglycans slightly decreased as compared with that of normal tissue, but the ratio of particular compounds varies. The percentage of chondroitin sulphate is increased and that of heparan sulphate significantly decreased. The significance of these changes in pathogenesis of aneurysms is discussed.
Matrix biology and pathology, a new branch of biomedical sciences.
The macromolecules of the intercellular matrix (MM) : collagen, elastin, proteoglycans and structural glycoproteins) are present in all tissues in variable amount and proportion. Some tissues, particularly rich in MM are designated as "connective tissues". Matrix macromolecules assure the integration of cells in tissues and of tissues in organs and in the whole organism. Differentiation, morphogenesis, maturation and aging are characterized by the variation of the raltiave rates of synthesis of individual MM-s. Several post-transcriptional and post-translational steps play an important role in biosynthesis of MM-S offering a multitude of possibilities for genetic and/or aquired anomalies. Recent progress in the descriptive and dynamic biochemistry of MM-s sheds new light on these anomalies which condition a whole class of diseases (the diseases of the intercellular matrix or matrix pathology). The molecular and cellular mechanisms of several of these diseases start to be understood. As the great majority of the important disease of occidental societies (such as vascular and articular diseases, diabetes, and the pathology of aging) belong to this category, intensive research in matrix biology and pathology as well as of its teaching in the medical curriculum should be considered as first priorities.
Maturation-dependent acquired coronary structural alterations and atherogenesis in the Dahl sodium-sensitive hypertensive rat.
Fifty-three Dahl S male rats were assigned to 2 dietary groups for the postweaning to early adolescence period (3 to 12 weeks): 29 to a standard diet (low-fat/low-sodium) and 24 to a high-fat/low-sodium diet. At age 9 weeks (just after puberty), animals from the high-fat group exhibited a relatively diminished density of coronary elastic fibers. There was no evidence of either lipid or monocytic infiltration of the subendothelial space. At age 12 weeks, most or all of the remaining animals in both groups were switched to a high-sodium/high-fat diet and were sampled through the following 8 weeks for the appearance of arterial lipid. After the switch, the high-fat-conditioned animals developed more extensive atherosclerotic pathological lesions more rapidly than their prepubertal standard-diet counterparts. The importance of the animal's stage of maturation in this effect was underscored by the observation that delaying onset of the high-fat diet to early adolescence resulted in no ultimate difference from the pubertal controls in elastic fiber density.
Long-term sun exposure alters the collagen of the papillary dermis. Comparison of sun-protected and photoaged skin by northern analysis, immunohistochemical staining, and confocal laser scanning microscopy.
Long-term solar irradiation produces both morphologic and functional changes in affected skin. Because collagen is the major structural component of skin, any alteration in its production or degradation could have profound effects on cutaneous functional integrity.
Our purpose was to investigate alterations in the production and morphology of collagen fibers brought about by long-term sun exposure.
We compared collagen and collagenase gene expression and collagen immunohistochemical staining and used confocal laser scanning microscopy for morphologic examination of dermal collagen fibers in photodamaged compared with sun-protected skin from the same persons.
Despite a large increase in elastin messenger RNA in sun-damaged skin, collagen and collagenase gene expression remained essentially unchanged. However, striking alterations in the papillary dermis of photoaged skin were found, which revealed large, abnormally clumped elastic fibers and deformed collagen fibers of various diameters, replacing the normal architecture of the papillary dermis.
Our data provide evidence for normal collagen gene expression in sun-damaged skin and suggest that degradation and remodeling of collagen take place in the papillary dermis accompanied by deposition of other matrix components, predominantly abnormal elastic fibers.
Age-related changes in amounts and concentrations of collagen and elastin in normotensive human thoracic aorta.
Twenty thoracic aortas were obtained post-mortem from subjects between the ages of 14 and 90 years who had previously been recorded as normotensive. Full wall thickness samples of 1 cm diameter were taken at six sites between heart valve and diaphragm. Lipid-free dry weight (mg per sample) and amounts (mg per sample) and concentrations (mg/mg dry weight) of collagen and elastin were determined. Lipid-free dry weight and amount of collagen showed highly significant decreases with age (P &lt; 0.0001), with the amount of elastin less so (P = 0.003), representing losses of 92%, 80% and 62%, respectively, between the ages of 14 and 90 years. In contrast, the concentrations of both collagen and elastin increased significantly with age (P &lt; or = 0.0002) by 72% and 140%, respectively, over the age range studied. However, in both cases, the increase occurred substantially after the age of 45. Therefore, besides demonstrating loss of collagen and elastin from the aortic wall with age, these results suggest strongly that there is a parallel loss of other aortic components at a rate which outstrips that of either collagen or elastin in later life.
Aged, 80 and over
[Elastolysis, aging and atherogenesis].
In order to explore the potential role and importance of elastin fiber degradation in atherogenesis we determined in more than 1,400 individuals (males and females between 59 and 71 years of age), [the EVA epidemiological study] serum parameters related to elastin fiber degradation: serum elastase activity, circulating elastin peptides and serum elastase inhibitor titers. Significant correlations were found these between parameters and several other serum constituents considered as risk-factors of atherogenesis--essentially serum lipid-parameters and glycemia as well as several other biological factors. These correlations confirm the validity of the underlying hypothesis concerning the interest of the clinical determinations of these elastin-related parameters and the potential role of the permanent activation of the endothelial elastin-receptor in atherogenesis.
Anatomy, histology, and development of the cardiac valvular system in elasmobranchs.
We report here on the anatomy, histology, and development of the three sets of cardiac valves in embryonic and adult elasmobranch fishes. The sinus venosus is the first segment of the heart to receive blood, and a pair of sinoatrial (SA) valves prevent backward flow of blood into the sinus venosus. The SA valves derive from two dorsolateral infoldings of the cardiac wall and consist of a simple endocardium covering transverse sheets rich in collagen. The SA valves are simple flaps of tissue without papillary muscles or chordae tendineae. Blood from the atrium passes the atrioventricular (AV; semilunar) valves, which are attached to papillary muscles in the ventricle by way of the chordae tendineae. A series of rows of conal or pocket valves (CV) in the conus arteriosus, equipped with chordae tendineae but no papillary muscles, prevent blood from reentering the ventricle. Chordae tendineae form in a similar fashion in both chambers. Elevations from the chamber wall emerge as a sheet covered on both surfaces with endocardium and separated by a core of connective tissue. Endocardial cells extend basal projections toward the opposing epithelium through their basal laminae. Basal cell projections make contact to create perforations that enlarge to produce spaces between the nascent chordae. Fibroblasts in the core of the chordae enlarge and strengthen the chordae by producing linear arrays of collagen fibers.
[Serum elastin peptide concentration and human leukocyte elastase/antiproteinase balance in peripheral obstructive atherosclerosis].
In some pathological states such as therosclerosis tissue destruction may be accelerated due to uncontrolled protease release of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and other events such as decreased concentration and/or the inactivation of main protease inhibitor molecules in the serum. In this study, the authors measured the elastase release of polymorphonuclear leukocytes which increased in atherosclerosis independently of the patients aged compared to healthy young subjects. These findings were similar to the response of polymorphonuclear leukocytes separated from healthy elderly subjects. Simultaneously, the main plasma proteinase inhibitors such as alpha-1-antitrypsin and alpha-2-macroglobulin in healthy and atherosclerotic subjects were determined. alpha-1-antitrypsin did not decrease significantly, whereas alpha-2-macroglobulin did in sera of atherosclerotic patients compared to age matched subjects (p &lt; 0.05). In contrast, the activity of porcine pancreatic elastase was more effectively neutralized by the plasma obtained from healthy subjects suggesting diminished antiprotease activity of sera obtained from patients. The authors concluded that increased elastase release and decreased antiproteinase activity should be considered in atherosclerotic arterial wall damage. The similarity of the results in aged and therosclerotic subjects suggests that arteriosclerosis is an earlier aging process.
Fine structure of rabbit ear chondrocytes in vitro and after autotransplantation.
Chondrocytes were isolated enzymatically from rabbit ear cartilage, grown in vitro or as autotransplants for 1, 2 or 5 weeks and then examined by transmission electron microscopy. A confluent monolayer formed rapidly in vitro and the cells later grew in multiple overlapping layers, producing thick sheets of cartilaginous tissue. The cells retained a normal structure throughout the period of observation and, like the chondrocytes in intact cartilage, showed numerous microfilaments, and extensive granular endoplasmic reticulum and a prominent Golgi complex. Large amounts of intercellular matrix were laid down in vitro consisting of thin collagen fibrils, small rounded or polygonal granules believed to represent proteoglycans and patches and fibres of elastin. Chondrocytes in intramuscular autotransplants reconstituted an elastic cartilage. The exogenous origin of the cells in the transplants was verified by labeling of the lysosomes by exposure of the cells to colloidal thorium dioxide particles prior to injection. Structurally, the cells and the matrix of the transplants conformed to the above description. Accumulations of elastin-like material were sometimes observed in the Golgi vacuoles of the cells. Extracellularly, such conglomerates aggregated in connection with bundles of microfibrils, building up mature elastic fibres with a dense amorphous structure. The culture and transplant systems characterized here provide suitable experimental models for studies on development, growth and aging of elastic cartilage, including various aspects of the formation and turnover of elastic fibres and other macromolecular matrix components.
We report a case of acrogeria. Biochemical analysis of patient fibroblasts demonstrated unaltered type III collagen synthesis. An RNA hybridization assay demonstrated that the levels of type I and elastin mRNAs were normal. The patient had multiple yellow papules on the neck, axilla and inguinal area which clinically and histologically resembled late-onset focal dermal elastosis. Both diseases may have some similar abnormal metabolism of connective tissue.
Hand
A distinction is made between atheromatous plaque formation and arteriosclerosis, only this second process is strictly age-dependent. Interactions between lipids and constituents of the vascular wall are however involved in both processes, although by different mechanisms. The progressive increase with age of elastase activity is a second important factor in the age-dependent progression of arteriosclerosis. The fragmentation of elastic fibers produces elastin peptides, present in the circulating blood in microgram/ml conc-s, increasing in several arteriopathies. The constant presence of elastin peptides in the circulation maintains activated the elastin receptor (16) on endothelial cells producing NO* with vasorelaxing activity (18). The simultaneous production of superoxyde leads to the formation of peroxynitrate, neutralized by reduced glutathion. This process, maintained over decades may well impair the antiradical defense mechanisms of the cells and deprive the endothelium from the vasorelaxing activity of NO*. We propose therefore that the maintained activation of the elastin receptor with free radical and lytic enzyme production might well represent the initiating process underlying atherogenesis.
Neutrophils obtained from obliterative atherosclerotic patients exhibit enhanced resting respiratory burst and increased degranulation in response to various stimuli.
Tissue destruction in atherosclerosis is partly due to uncontrolled protease and oxygen radical release. In this study we investigated the release of elastase and myeloperoxidase, as well as the production of reactive oxygen species by polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNLs) obtained from patients with obliterative atherosclerotic of the lower legs. In addition we measured the plasma concentration of xanthine oxidase. PMNLs of atherosclerotic patients have a greater ability to increase elastase and myeloperoxidase release after their stimulation with formyl-methionin-leucyl-phenylalanin (fMLP) and calcium ionophore, A23187, independently of their age, than PMNLs of healthy middle-aged subjects. Similarly to healthy elderly subjects there was an increased superoxide anion (O2-) production under basal condition in both atherosclerotic patient age-groups. The activation of PMNLs with fMLP and A23187 enhanced O2- formation both in healthy subjects and in patients with atherosclerotic disease of the lower legs, however the increase was significantly less in the latter group. No biochemical parameters showed significant correlation with patient's risk factors, however myeloperoxidase production was significantly higher in less severe stage of the disease (P &lt; 0.05). We found that patients with atherosclerotic disease of the lower legs have higher plasma xanthine oxidase level than control subjects. This study indicates an other piece of evidence suggesting the activation and involvement of neutrophils in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis of the lower legs. The similar tendencies in the reactivity of neutrophils during aging and in atherosclerosis suggest that atherosclerosis may be an early aging process.
Mechanisms of photoaging and chronological skin aging.
Human skin, like all other organs, undergoes chronological aging. In addition, unlike other organs, skin is in direct contact with the environment and therefore undergoes aging as a consequence of environmental damage. The primary environmental factor that causes human skin aging is UV irradiation from the sun. This sun-induced skin aging (photoaging), like chronological aging, is a cumulative process. However, unlike chronological aging, which depends on the passage of time per se, photoaging depends primarily on the degree of sun exposure and skin pigment. Individuals who have outdoor lifestyles, live in sunny climates, and are lightly pigmented will experience the greatest degree of photoaging. During the last decade, substantial progress has been made in understanding cellular and molecular mechanisms that bring about chronological aging and photoaging. This emerging information reveals that chronological aging and photoaging share fundamental molecular pathways. These new insights regarding convergence of the molecular basis of chronological aging and photoaging provide exciting new opportunities for the development of new anti-aging therapies. This article reviews our current understanding and presents new data about the molecular pathways that mediate skin damage by UV irradiation and by the passage of time.
Aged, 80 and over
Sensitivity and Specificity
Aging of the vascular wall and atherogenesis: role of the elastin-laminin receptor.
Aging of the vascular wall, arteriosclerosis and focal lipidic plaques, atheromatosis, often occur together but may occur separately as lipidic lesions in young children or vascular aging in some animal species resistant to lipid-rich diet as the rat. Most theories of athero-arteriosclerosis claim an endothelial lesion for its initiation, without proposing a detailed mechanism. The elastin-laminin receptor present also on endothelial cells, mediates NO.-dependent vasorelaxation. It could be shown that chronic exposure to higher concentrations of the agonist, elastin peptides, present in human blood at microgram/ml concentrations, and also during aging, the receptor gets "uncoupled" from its transmission pathway (G-protein, PLC, PKC) but continues releasing free radicals as superoxyde. NO. and O2-. give peroxynitrite, a toxic anion, needing GSH for its neutralisation. GSH production decreases with age. This process decreases available NO. for vasorelaxation and could then contribute to age-dependent blood pressure increase and produce the endothelial lesions leading to the development of athero-arteriosclerosis.
Sustained improvement with prolonged topical tretinoin for photodamaged skin has been well documented for up to 22 months of continuous treatment. We now report long-term (4 years) histologic effects of topical tretinoin in photodamaged skin of 27 patients, the longest study to date. The observed decreases in dermal elastin content and perivascular inflammation and increase in epidermal mucin in facial biopsies obtained after up to 4 years of treatment may be partly responsible for the continued clinical improvement. Furthermore, the study shows that there are no untoward effects on keratinocytes or melanocytes during long-term use of topical tretinoin.
Randomized Controlled Trial
The effects of age on the human heart elastic fibers were studied by light and electron microscopy. Studies were done on 15 hearts from male subjects 42 days to 87 years of age. Using specific staining procedures, the length of elastic fibers was determined by morphometry in the parenchyma of right and left ventricles. These studies suggest that the length of elastic fibers per unit heart volume is present early in life, possibly at birth, and thereafter remains constant until adulthood. Average fiber length increases significantly beyond the third decade of life which can be interpreted as a continuous formation of new fibers and a continuous apposition of elastic-type material to these fibers. Electron microscopy confirmed the presence of mature elastic fibers at birth, since they contained amorphous substance (elastin) surrounded by numerous microfibrils. In the adult hearts, the amount of amorphous substance has increased and the number of microfibrils has decreased. With advancing age the amorphous substance forms areas of rarefaction and the microfibrils have disappeared. Whether or not such morphometric modifications could influence the elastic properties of the ventricular myocardium requires further study.
Aldehyde-fuchsin: historical and chemical considerations.
The staining mechanisms of Gomori's aldehyde-fuchsin are not yet fully understood. It seemed therefore timely to review the history of this dye class in context with current dye and aldehyde chemistry. In 1861 Lauth treated basic fuchsin with acetaldehyde. This dye became known as Aldehyde Blue, but consisted of violet and blue dyes. Schiff (1866) studied several aldehyde-fuchsins; these compounds contained two molecules of dye and three molecules of aldehyde. Acetaldehyde-fuchsin prepared according to Schiff's directions showed staining properties similar to those of Gomori's aldehyde-fuchsin. This dye class was soon superseded by new dyes more suitable for textile dyeing, and chemical investigations of aldehyde-fuchsins ceased around the turn of the century. Gomori's aldehyde-fuchsin has been regarded as a Schiff base. However, according to chemical data, low molecular aliphatic aldehydes and aromatic amines tend to form condensation products. Correlations of chemical and histochemical observations suggest such processes during aging of dye solutions. Models of dimers and polymers of aldehyde-fuchsin could be built without steric hindrance. The nature of the bonds formed by various components of aldehyde-fuchsin solutions is not clear. However, cystine in proteins, e.g. in basement membranes, apparently does not play a role in the binding of aldehyde-fuchsin by unoxidized Carnoy- or methacarn-fixed sections.
Salivary Glands/analysis
Staining and Labeling/methods*
Previous studies have shown that biomechanical analysis of aorta from diabetic subjects reveals a marked increase in stiffness compared to aorta from age-matched control subjects. In the present paper we have proposed that this increased stiffness can be attributed to glycation-induced inter-molecular cross-links based on a direct analysis of the two known glycation cross-links, the fluorescent pentosidine and the non-fluorescent NFC-1. There was a significant difference in the increase in concentration of both cross-links with increasing age for both the intima (p &lt; 0.0025) and the media (p &lt; 0.0005) from the diabetic compared to the control subjects, but no correlation with the mature enzymic cross-link hy droxylysyl-pyridinoline. Finally, we have obtained a significant correlation of stiffness with both glycation cross-links (NFC-1, r = 0.86; p &lt; 0.005 and pentosidine r = 0.75, p &lt; 0.05), but the concentration of NFC-1 is about 50 times greater than that of pentosidine, indicating that it is the major glycation cross-link responsible for the stiffening of the aorta.
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, UK.
Portland Press - PDF
Elastic fiber-associated proteins of skin in development and photoaging.
We sought to use antibodies against structural (tropoelastin fibrillin) and nonstructural (decay-accelerating factor [DAF], serum amyloid P -SAP- components of elastic fibers to characterize fiber structure in neonatal skin, normal adult skin and adult skin with solar elastosis from advanced photoaging. We found by immunohistochemistry and by western blotting that DAF, unlike SAP, is present on cutaneous elastic fibers in neonates and young children, suggesting that DAF may play an early, integral role in protecting elastic fibers from destruction by complement. The most superficial portion of oxytalan fibers stained with antibodies against fibrillin and DAF, while anti-tropoelastin stained only the deeper portion of oxytalan fibers. This suggests that deep oxytalan fibers are composed of both elastin and microfibrils, while the most superficial component is composed solely of microfibrillar proteins. Solar elastosis showed increased fibrillin, DAF, tropoelastin and SAP. Thus, solar elastosis is composed of both microfibrillar and elastin proteins.
Analysis of connective tissue macromolecular components in Ishibashi rat skin: role of collagen and elastin in cutaneous aging.
The Ishibashi (IS) rat, established from cross-breeding between Wistar and wild rats, has a unique skin appearance, with wrinklings and furrows indicative of skin aging appearing at the age of 12 weeks. To understand the underlying mechanism of the formation of wrinkles, macromolecular components of connective tissue, collagen and elastin, in the young (5-6-week-old) and the aged (23-30-week-old) IS rat skins were biochemically analyzed. Hydroxyproline and isodesmosine contents in the aged IS rats were reduced 22% (P &lt; 0.05) and 37% (P &lt; 0.05) compared to the young rats, whereas no significant differences in the contents of both macromolecules in control Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were seen. The relative content of type III collagen was unaltered between the young and aged skins of both IS and SD rats. A relative decrease in the intact elastin molecule (65 kDa) and a relative increase in the elastin fragments with lower molecular weights were observed in the aged IS rat skin by immunoblotting method. These results indicate that the reduction in collagen and elastin contents and increased degradation of elastin molecules in the aged IS rat skin could be related to the formation of wrinkles. Thus, the IS rat may provide a useful model for the study of skin aging.
Biochemical basis of lipofuscin, ceroid, and age pigment-like fluorophores.
Serious studies of the formation mechanisms of age-related pigments and their possible cellular influence have been hampered for a long time by discrepancies and controversies over the definition, fluorescence emission, origin, and composition of these pigments. This review discusses several critical controversies in this field and lay special emphasis on the cellular and biochemical reactions related to the formation mechanisms of lipofuscin, ceroid, advanced glycation end-products (AGEs), and age pigment like fluorophores (APFs). Various amino compounds and their reaction with secondary aldehydic products of oxygen free radical-induced oxidation, particularly lipid peroxidation, are important sources of the fluorophores of ceroid/lipofuscin, which progressively accumulate as a result of phagocytosis and autophagocytosis of modified biomaterials within secondary lysosomes of postmitotic and other cells. Lipofuscin is the classical age pigment of postmitotic cells, while ceroid accumulates due to pathologic and experimental processes. There are good reasons to consider both ceroid and lipofuscin as materials of the same principal origin. The age-related intracellular fluorophores of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) seems to represent a special class of lipofuscin, which partly contains derivatives of retinoids and carotenoids. Saccharide-originated fluorophores, principally AGEs formed during glycation/Maillard reactions, may be mainly responsible for the extracellular fluorescence of long-lived proteins, such as collagen, elastin, and lens crystalline. Although lipofuscin, ceroid, AGEs, and APFs can be produced from different types of biological materials due to different side reactions of essential biology, the crosslinking of carbonyl-amino compounds is recognized as a common process during their formation.
Elastin, past, present and future.
Atherosclerosis and the vascular biology of aging.
Vascular Biology Unit, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.
With advancing age, a series of structural, architectural and compositional modifications take place in the vasculature. The diameter of the vessels tends to increase, and thickening of intimal and medial layers is often observed. In the subendothelial space, blood-derived leukocytes and an increased amount of "activated" smooth muscle cells are present. Extracellular matrix accumulates and becomes particularly rich in glycosaminoglycans. Collagen content increases, while elastin fibers appear progressively disorganized, thinner, and frequently fragmented. These changes in the normal architecture of the vessel wall, that could be referred to as "the vasculopathy of aging", are likely to be the consequence of adaptive mechanisms to maintain normal conditions of flow, mechanical stress and/or wall tension. Although many of these features are similar to the histological findings of the atherosclerotic vessels, atherosclerosis and age-related "vasculopathy" are two distinct phenomena. Nonetheless, several experimental observations in animal models suggest a special link between "the vasculopathy of aging" and atherosclerotic disease, and suggest a particular predisposition of the old vessel to develop the atherosclerotic lesion. Compared to vessels from young animals, older ones show a greater reactivity to mechanical injury and to chronic insults. This may reflect changes in the biology of the vessels that are "intrinsic" to the aging process. Indeed, aging affects the function and responsiveness of the endothelium and vascular smooth muscle cells. Endothelial permeability is increased with age, while ability to produce vasoactive substances declines. Smooth muscle cells from old individuals show a growth advantage over the young ones, and display an increased ability to migrate toward chemoattractants. Moreover, the accumulation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs) occurring with aging can trigger a series of cellular events, such as cellular oxidative stress, expression of leukocyte adhesion molecules, endothelial transmigration of monocytes, and smooth muscle cell chemotaxis, all considered important prelesional events in the atherogenesis process. Taken together, the changes occurring with aging, while unproven to initiate lesion formation per se, are likely to accelerate the development of the atherosclerotic plaque and contribute to increased severity of this disease in the elderly.
Urinary desmosine excretion in smokers with and without rapid decline of lung function: the Normative Aging Study.
It is hypothesized that smoking-related chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) results in part from excess lung elastin degradation. Taking advantage of spirometry performed over a 12-yr period at the Normative Aging Study, we conducted a nested case-control study of elastin and collagen degradation rates in current smokers with (n = 10) and without (n = 8) rapid decline of lung function, using a biochemical assay for urinary desmosine (DES), a specific marker for mature elastin degradation, and hydroxylysylpyridinoline (HP), a specific marker for mature fibrillar collagen degradation. Mean urinary excretion of DES in rapid decliners was 36% greater than in slow decliners (9.8 +/- 0.7 [mean +/- SE] versus 7.2 +/- 0.4 microg/g creatinine, p &lt; 0.01); after adjustment for age and lean body mass (LBM), DES excretion in rapid decliners was 30% greater than in slow decliners (9.6 +/- 0.6 versus 7.4 +/- 0.7 microg/g creatinine, p = 0.06). Among rapid decliners, there was no difference in DES excretion between those with and those without computed tomogaphic evidence of emphysema. There was no significant difference between rapid and slow decliners in mean urinary excretion of HP (24.7 +/- 1.4 versus 21.6 +/- 1.8 nmol/mmol creatinine, p = 0.18). Among all subjects, rate of decline of FEV1 was significantly correlated with DES excretion (r = 0.61, p &lt; 0.01). In a linear regression model adjusting for age and LBM, an increase in DES excretion of 1 microg/g creatinine was associated with an excess decline of FEV1 of 10.6 ml/yr (p = 0.04). This study provides further evidence in support of the elastase-antielastase hypothesis of the pathogenesis of COPD, and it suggests a role for elastin degradation in both emphysema and small airways disease. Moreover, it suggests that urinary DES excretion may be a useful biochemical marker for the study of interventions designed to prevent the development or progression of COPD.
Intramyocardial arterial cushions of coronary vessels in animals and humans: morphology, occurrence and relation to heart disease.
The existence of coronary endoarterial cushions (CEC) in the human heart as nonpathological, functional entities has been debated, and CEC have been sparsely reported in animals. Arterial cushions are localized thickenings that protrude into the lumen of specific arteries. We have identified CEC in the rhesus monkey, dog, sheep, goat, pig, rabbit and rat, and in the human heart. Two distinct types are described: the ovoid CEC arranged singly, in pairs, or in groups of three to four, and the less common polypoid CEC seen primarily in humans. The highest incidence of CEC in rabbits and humans was in the left ventricle in arteries 150-488 microns in diameter. Light and electron microscopy demonstrated intimal location with smooth muscle cells surrounded by ground substance, collagen and elastin fibers in a highly organized pattern. Nerve fibers identified by their immunoreactivity with antiserum to the vasodilatory calcitonin-gene-related peptide contacted the CEC along the tunica media and were occasionally seen within CEC. Arrangement and histological composition of CEC suggest a role in the regulation of local blood flow and myocardial perfusion. In human hearts, the CEC density index correlated highly with the degree of heart disease. In subjects with high heart disease rating, increased connective tissue, lipid-like infiltration and calcification was seen within CEC, and foam cells were present in CEC of obese rabbits. This suggests that CEC in coronary arteries could be predisposed sites of atherosclerosis, and that injured CEC can cause coronary artery spasm and ischemia. We conclude that CEC occur in animals and humans as innervated intimal smooth muscle cushions that might have a role in myocardial perfusion and heart disease.
Department of Surgery, Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Albert Einstein, College of Medicine, New Hyde Park, New York 11042, USA.
Micro-methods for serial determinations of elastin metabolism parameters in blood plasma and serum.
Micro-methods are described for the serial determinations of elastin metabolism related parameters in human serum or plasma samples: serum elastase activity, elastase inhibitor titers and elastin peptide conc-s. These methods were used in an epidemiological study (the EVA study, " Etude du vieillissement vasculaire") carried out in Nantes, west of France on several thousand individuals. Blood samples obtained from the first-1389 individuals (574 males, 815 females) were used for the determinations. In order to carry out this large number of determinations previously described procedures had to be modified. These methods used for the large serial determinations of the above mentioned three elastin metabolism related serum (or plasma) parameters are described because of their potential interest for serial clinical investigations.
We hypothesized that abnormal capillary formation, which might be associated with an alteration in extracellular malular matrix (ECM), occurs in the alveoli of growing rat lungs treated with beta-aminopropionitrile (beta APN), a lathyrogen that inhibits lysyl oxidase activity. On scanning electron microscopy, a corrosion cast of alveolar capillaries in lungs treated with beta APN appeared abnormal in configuration; transmission electron microscopy showed extensive morphological changes in interstitial cells and ECMs, including collagen, elastin, and presumably glycosaminoglycans and, in binding water (GBW). Morphometric data revealed an increase in GBW of up to 24.4%, a decrease in the amount of collagen fiber (44.5%), and a decrease in lipid-laden interstitial cells; however, the change in elastin was limited to morphological appearance. From these observations, we conclude that alterations in alveolar capillary formation are associate with extensive changes in ECMs, and that these changes in ECM components might also be involved in the abnormal alveolar formations induced by beta APN.
Expression of collagen and elastic fibers in duct-ligated submandibular glands of mice.
Atrophy of salivary glands may occur by ductal obstruction caused by calculus, infection or neoplastic processes, or as consequence of systemic diseases and aging. In the present work, we have used histochemical methods to study the expression of elastic and collagen fibers during experimental atrophy of the submandibular gland of mice. Glandular atrophy was accompanied by a rapid increase in collagen deposition in both septal and intralobular regions. The expression of elastic fibers was not significantly altered during atrophy: a discrete increase of elastic fibers was noted only around ductal structures. The results showed that experimental ductal obstruction is a useful in vivo model to study molecular events that take part in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix during atrophy of salivary glands.
Submandibular Gland/metabolism
Submandibular Gland/pathology*
Glycation of collagen: the basis of its central role in the late complications of ageing and diabetes.
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Bristol, Langford, U.K.
The most serious late complication of ageing and diabetes mellitus follow similar patterns in the dysfunction of retinal capillaries, renal tissue, and the cardiovascular system. The changes are accelerated in diabetic patients owing to hyerglycaemia and are the major cause of premature morbidity and mortality. These tissues and their optimal functioning are dependent on the integrity of their supporting framework of collagen. It is the modification of the properties by glycation that results in many of the damaging late complications. Initially glycation affects the interactions of collagen with cells and other matrix components, but the most damaging effects are caused by the formation of glucose-mediated intermolecular cross-links. These cross-links decrease the critical flexibility and permeability of the tissues and reduce turnover. In contrast to the renal and retinal tissue, the cardiovascular system also contains a significant proportion of other fibrous connective tissue protein elastin, and its properties are similarly modified by glycation. The nature of these glycation cross-links is now being unravelled and this knowledge is crucial in any attempt to inhibit these deleterious glycation reactions.
Department of Ophthalmology, United Medical and Dental School of Guy's Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
A hydraulic conductivity chamber was designed that enabled us to measure flow across Bruch's membrane while ablating its subepithelial aspect using an excimer laser (193 nm). When resistance was lost, samples were fixed and processed for electron microscopy.
Changes in the hydraulic conductivity of Bruch's membrane in response to the excimer-mediated sequential removal of tissue layers was studied in four control eyes of donors 26, 46, 61, and 76 years of age and in one eye of an 83-year-old donor with age-related macular degeneration. The number of laser pulses required to abolish the resistance in Bruch's membrane was found to be dependent on the age of the donor. The ablation rate was approximately 0.11 micron per pulse. Loss of resistance correlated with removal of layers internal to the layer of elastin.
This study indicates that the inner collage-nous layer imparts the major resistance to fluid movement between the retinal pigment epithelium and the choroid. Aging changes in the ultrastructure of these compartments could be responsible for the decrease in hydraulic conductivity observed in early life in previous studies.
Aged, 80 and over
Aging is associated with reduced deposition of specific extracellular matrix components, an upregulation of angiogenesis, and an altered inflammatory response in a murine incisional wound healing model.
The concept that aging impairs wound healing is largely unsubstantiated, the literature being contradictory because of poor experimental design and a failure to adequately characterize animal models. This study tested the hypothesis that aging retards the rate of wound repair using standardized cutaneous incisional wounds in a well-characterized aging mouse colony. Against the background of age-related changes in normal dermal composition, marked differences in healing were observed. Immunostaining for fibronectin was decreased in the wounds of the old mice, with a delay in the inflammatory response, re-epithelialization, and the appearance of extracellular matrix components. Heparan sulfate and blood vessel staining were both unexpectedly increased in the wounds of the old animals at late time points. Despite an overall decrease in collagen I and III deposition in the wounds of old mice, the dermal organization was surprisingly similar to that of normal dermal basket-weave collagen architecture. By contrast, young animals developed abnormal, dense scars. Intriguingly, some of these age-related changes in scar quality and inflammatory cell profile are similar to those seen in fetal wound healing. The rate of healing in young animals appears to be increased at the expense of the scar quality, perhaps resulting from an altered inflammatory response.
Surgery in the elderly requires a knowledge of the changes in the larynx that take place with aging. In the elderly larynx, there are changes in the elastin and collagen fibers within the lamina propria. There is also thinning and atrophy of the mucous membranes and atrophy of the mucous glands. Common disorders are vocal fold atrophy, sulcus vocalis, glottic incompetence, and vocal fold edema. A reduction in the number of lymphatic channels is responsible for the vocal fold edema. Vocal fold atrophy is responsible for the increase in pitch that is frequently heard in elderly men. Other common conditions in the elderly include vocal fold nodules, polyps, and Reinke's edema. The most common phonosurgical procedures performed in the elderly are vocal fold surgery for benign pathology and laryngeal structure surgery for glottic incompetence. Microsurgical techniques on benign vocal fold lesions aim to avoid injury to the transitional layer, which is rich in fibroblasts. Although the superficial layer of the lamina propria involves less fibroblastic activity, any surgical manipulation of the lamina propria can influence the vibratory properties of the vocal folds, particularly when the basement membrane zone is manipulated. The alterations in phonosurgical techniques used in the elderly are the result of histologic changes in the vocal folds and altered wound healing. Functional voice disorders often develop to compensate for the structural changes in the larynx. Correction of hyperfunctional or abnormal functional technique is as important as phonosurgical correction of vocal fold pathology.
Surgical Procedures, Operative/standards
Static lung pressure-volume curves, lung volumes, spirometry, diffusing capacity for CO, and airway and total pulmonary resistance were determined in 11 young men with juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus who were not cigarette smokers. Twelve nonsmoking men of similar age without diabetes served as control subjects. Elastic recoil at low lung volumes was significantly less in the diabetics than in the control group. Total lung capacity was also decreased in the diabetics. There were no significant differences between the 2 groups in the other parameters of pulmonary function measured. It is postulated that the abnormalities in lung elastic behavior are manifestations of the widespread elastin and collagen abnormalities that have been demonstrated in diabetes and are, in some respects, similar to those that occur during normal aging. Loss of elastic recoil at low lung volumes may cause more significant decreases in flows and gas transport as the juvenile diabetics age.
The experimental and analytical methods presented in the companion paper [1] are used here to study the effects of cryopreservation on the in vitro biaxial random-elastic mechanical properties of canine saphenous veins. The properties of specimens tested in their physiological range of loadings immediately after thawing were not significantly different from their properties before cryopreservation. However, they stiffened significantly in the few hours following thawing. This effect was not observed for aging fresh specimens, nor for cyanide-poisoned specimens, indicating that the static tone of the venous smooth muscle may be affected by cryopreservation and thawing, but the elastin and collagen fibers are most likely unaffected.
Cryopreservation/standards*
It is well known that the elastic property of human aorta decreases gradually with age. Since the cross-linking structures are responsible for this elasticity, age-related changes of cross-linking amino acids in human aorta were studied using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Non-atherosclerotic areas of thoracic aorta of 27 autopsy cases which had no particular aortic disease were obtained. After acid hydrolysis, SEP-PAK silica-gel column and Fe3+/activated charcoal column pretreatment were carried out for analysis of desmosine (DES), isodesmosine (ISDES), neodesmosine (NEO), oxodesmosine (OXO) and isooxodesomosine (ISOXO), and for analysis of aldosine (ALD), respectively. These prepared samples were applied to the reversed-phase HPLC column. We also analyzed pyridinoline (PYR), a major cross-linking amino acid of collagen as an index of fibrosis. All cross-linking amino acids of elastin rapidly increased in infancy and then gradually decreased with age. In the middle- and old-age, the amount of OXO showed marked variety. PYR was little detected at 0-year-old, and then gradually increased with age. The crosslinks of elastin were rapidly formed in childhood and then decreased with age. These findings suggest that the relative increase of NEO, OXO or ISOXO to DES and ISDES is associated with age-related weakening and/or damage of elastin, and that the gradual shift from elastin- to collagen-dominant state is a possible cause of the loss of elasticity and the gain of stiffness in the aging aorta.
Aged, 80 and over
J-STAGE, Japan Science and Technology Information Aggregator, Electronic
Department of Dermatology, Jefferson Medical College and Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, USA.
Changes in biomechanical properties, composition of collagen and elastin, and advanced glycation endproducts of the rat aorta in relation to age.
During ageing and senescence the aorta becomes stiffer and its elasticity is reduced. The mechanism causing this increased stiffness of the aortic wall was studied using a rat model. Ring-shaped samples were prepared from the thoracic aorta of three groups of rats aged 4.5, 14 and 27 months, representing young, adult and old animals. Analysis of the static biomechanical properties showed increased diameter (2.20 +/- 0.03 mm) and increased stiffness (4.0 +/- 0.2 mN) of aortic samples from old rats compared with adult rats (1.82 +/- 0.02 mm and 3.0 +/- 0.1 mN, respectively). The total hydroxyproline and elastin content per sample was not changed. However, the hydroxyproline content/mm2 of the aortic wall was reduced by 20% and the elastin content/mm2 of the aortic wall was reduced by 19% comparing the old with the adult rats. No differences were found in the pyridinoline concentrations between old and adult rats. The collagen- and elastin-associated fluorescence was determined as a marker of advanced glycation endproducts (AGE). Both parameters were increased in the old rats compared with the adult rats by 42% and 17%, respectively, and positively correlated with stiffness at physiological loads. A positive correlation between collagen-associated fluorescence and maximum stiffness was found as well. In conclusion, the age-related increase in stiffness of the aorta was associated with increased diameter, reduced collagen and elastin contents/mm2 of the aortic wall, increased fenestration of elastic laminae and accumulation of fluorescent material in collagen and elastin.
Long-term incubation of proteins with glucose leads to the formation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs), which are characterized by fluorescence, brown color, and cross-linking. Formation of AGEs in vitro requires oxygen and is dependent on transition metal-catalyzed oxidation of glucose or Amadori products. AGEs are thought to be involved in aging and age-enhanced diseases such as diabetic complications, atherosclerosis, dialysis-related amyloidosis, and Alzheimer's disease. Chronic exposure of the skin to sunlight induces hyperplasia of the elastic tissue in the upper dermis known as actinic elastosis. Herein we used a monoclonal anti-AGE antibody (6D12) whose epitope is N(epsilon)-(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML), one of the glycoxidation products of AGEs, and demonstrated that the lesions of actinic elastosis were modified by CML. Further immunohistochemical and immunoelectron microscopic examination with 6D12 demonstrated CML accumulates predominantly in elastic fibers especially in the amorphous electron-dense materials corresponding to photo-induced degenerated area rather than the electron-lucent region. Immunochemical analyses with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) of elastase-soluble fractions demonstrated that the CML levels of the sun-exposed area were significantly higher than those of the sun-unexposed area. We conclude that ultraviolet-induced oxidation may accelerate CML formation in actinic elastosis of photoaged skin.
Aged, 80 and over
Distribution of elastin in hamsters and the turnover rates of different elastin pools.
Desmosine (DES) and isodesmosine (IDES) concentration in the urine can be used as a noninvasive method of assessing degradation of mature elastin in normal and pathologic states. The present study was undertaken to determine the distribution of elastin among organs and tissues of normal hamsters, and to determine the turnover rates of two elastin-containing organs (lung, thoracic aorta) as a reflection of their contributions to DES and IDES excretion in the urine. Hamsters were metabolically labeled at 5 days of age with 14C-lysine and studied at 1.5, 4.5, 8, and 12 months of age. The aorta DES + IDES-associated radioactivity did not change significantly over the age span of 1.5-12 months. Lung DES + IDES-associated radioactivity decreased with a half-life of 420 days. Measurement of DES + IDES pools in other tissues, with relatively low concentrations of elastin, was carried out by the isotope dilution technique. At 12 months of age, the head and paws pool, skin, skeletal muscle, gastrointestinal tract, heart-liver-kidney-spleen pool, lungs, and thoracic aorta represented 37%, 28%, 13%, 11%, 6%, 4%, and 1%, respectively, of total body DES + IDES. The organs with the highest DES + IDES-specific radioactivity at 12 months were heart-liver-kidney-spleen, lung, and gastrointestinal tract, with 310, 217, and 217 dpm/nmol, respectively. Skin had the lowest specific radioactivity, with 90 dpm/nmol. The specific radioactivity of DES + IDES in urine was 62 dpm/nmol at 12 months, down from 251 dpm/nmol at 1.5 months. These data clearly indicate that non-lung tissues contain a high proportion of the total body DES + IDES and suggest that pathology in these other pools of DES + IDES could result in significant elevation of urinary DES + IDES. Nevertheless, the relatively high specific radioactivity of DES + IDES in lung elastin as compared with urine makes monitoring labeled urinary DES + IDES in this animal model a sensitive tool for assessing elastin degradation in experimental lung disease.
We have recently shown, on young adult rat aorta rings, that elastin peptides induce a dose and endothelium-dependent vasodilation mediated by the 67 kDa subunit of the high affinity elastin-laminin receptor and, at least in part, by EDRF (NO). Here we have studied the effects of elastin peptides at circulating concentrations and below, on noradrenaline-contracted rat aortic rings, as a function of age. First, we have observed that, unlike 2-month-old (2M), 4-6-month-old (4M) and 12-month-old (12M) rat aorta rings, 30-month-old (30M) rat aorta rings were unable to maintain their contraction in long lasting experiments. Secondly, elastin peptides at physiological circulating concentrations (10(-6)-10(-3) mg/ml) induce a dose-dependent vasodilation on 4M rings. By contrast, only higher elastin peptide concentrations (10(-3) mg/ml) were effective on 12M rings, whereas rings from both younger (2M) and older animals (30M) did not respond to elastin peptides. Finally, using lactose and laminin as inhibitors, we have demonstrated that elastin peptide-induced vasodilation on 4M and 12M rings is mediated by the 67 kDa subunit of the elastin-laminin receptor. These experiments suggest that the functional availability of the 67 kDa subunit of the elastin-laminin receptor changes with age. It could be hypothesized that in young animals (0-2M) the reusable shuttle role recently demonstrated for the 67 kDa receptor subunit during elastic fiber formation leads to a major decrease in its availability for signal transduction. On the contrary, in adult animals. (4-12M), when developmental elastogenesis is completed, this subunit is essential for extracellular signal transduction. Inefficiency of this receptor in old animals (30M) can be attributed to its uncoupling from its transduction pathway, as previously shown on human cells. Finally, the age-dependent variations of circulating elastin peptide concentration and elastin-laminin receptor responsiveness to elastin peptides are two independent parameters which could influence the vascular tension regulation.
The effects of ultraviolet A (UVA) and reactive oxygen species (ROS), generated by a xanthine and xanthine oxidase (XOD) system, on the mRNA expression of elastin, were investigated using cultured human dermal fibroblasts. Total RNA was isolated and subjected to Northern blot analysis using synthesized 530 base cDNA probe for elastin with primers derived from exon 10 and 1 of human elastin. UVA irradiation did not affect elastin mRNA expression. In contrast, ROS resulted in a dose-related increase in the level of elastin mRNA up to 1.8-fold in cultured human dermal fibroblasts. Catalase, used as scavenger, essentially prevented the ROS induced alterations in elastin mRNA levels. These results suggest that ROS produced in the dermis may contribute to elastin deposition observed in photoaging skin.
Aging of the vascular wall: serum concentration of elastin peptides and elastase inhibitors in relation to cardiovascular risk factors. The EVA study.
The relations of biological markers of extracellular matrix (plasma elastin peptides and elastase inhibitors) to the clinical history of cardiovascular diseases and risk factors for atherosclerosis were examined in a large population study (the EVA Study) on vascular and cognitive aging performed in 1389 men and women aged 59-71 years. A moderate decrease in elastin peptides was observed in women with a self-reported history of coronary heart disease (P &lt; 0.091) and stroke (P &lt; 0.03) as well as with diabetes (P &lt; 0.043). Similar but non-significant trends were found in men. Furthermore, elastin peptides were significantly and positively correlated to HDL-cholesterol and apolipoprotein A1 in both sexes. On the other hand, elastase inhibitor titers were significantly higher in women than in men. A moderate increase was also found in men (P &lt; 0.097) and women (P &lt; 0.068) with a history of coronary heart disease that reached significance level after pooling both sexes (P &lt; 0.014). Furthermore, elastase inhibitor titers were significantly and positively related to fibrinogen and C reactive protein in either sex. No consistent associations were observed between both biological markers of extracellular matrix and age, blood pressure, body mass index and tobacco or alcohol consumption. These results suggest that a decrease in elastin peptides and an increase in elastase inhibitors might be associated with risk factors of atherogenesis as well as with atherosclerosis-related diseases.
The clinical significance of aortic compliance and its assessment with magnetic resonance imaging.
The biophysical properties of the aortic wall seems to play a significant role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease such as atherosclerosis, hypertension, aneurysm formation, Marfan's syndrome, and in normal aging. The presence and the proportion of smooth muscle, collagen, and elastin proteins contribute to the compliance of the vessel wall with the latter being the most extensible component. However, elastin fibers fracture at low stresses contributing to a decrease of the aortic compliance and consequently to an elevation of the pulse pressure, which is a risk factor of cardiovascular disease. Early detection of a decrease in the aortic compliance could help to identify early cardiovascular disease in asymptomatic patients and monitor the results of the therapeutic interventions. Therefore, estimation of the aortic compliance can be used for both screening as well as long-term follow-up. Magnetic resonance imaging which is a noninvasive, accurate, and reproducible method can estimate the compliance of the aortic wall either by measuring the relative change in cross sectional area of a chosen segment using ECG-triggered spin echo or gradient echo sequences or by measuring the pulse wave velocity through the aorta using the phase contrast-magnetic resonance imaging (PC-MRI) technique. Both techniques have been validated and many sudies suggest MRI as a valuable tool for evaluating aortic wall function. However, large prospective studies are mandatory for the method to be established as a screening tool.
Effect of lithium on superoxide production and intracellular free calcium mobilization in elastin peptide (kappa-elastin) and FMLP stimulated human PMNS. Effect of age.
The effect of lithium pretreatment on superoxide anion production and intracellular free calcium levels was investigated in polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) from middle-aged and old individuals after stimulation by elastin peptides or FMLP. K-elastin (KE) significantly stimulated the production of superoxide anion by PMNs from middle-aged subjects, while this stimulation decreased with age and was absent in PMNs of elderly arteriosclerotic patients. Li pretreatment slightly increased this stimulating effect of KE in PMNs from middle-aged subjects and elderly arteriosclerotic patients, while slightly decreased in healthy elderly subjects. Moreover, Li was able to increase superoxide anion production even in the absence of KE, but this effect decreased also in PMNs of healthy and arteriosclerotic elderly patients. FMLP significantly increased superoxide anion production in all age-groups, but this effect was further amplified by Li only in PMNs of middle-aged subjects. In aged individuals Li pretreatment slightly decreased the effect of FMLP and had no effect in arteriosclerotic patients. Ca-mobilization induced by KE was inhibited by Li pretreatement in each age group. This inhibition by Li was much weaker in FMLP-stimulated PMNs. Li pretreatment did however modify the shape of the Ca-transient curves in FMLP stimulated leukocytes suggesting a qualitative modification of ion channel regulation. No such shape change of Ca-transient curves was observed after KE stimulation of Li pretreated PMNs. It appears that the regulation of these two receptors is differently affected by Li treatment.
Scand J Med Sci Sports.
Function and biomechanics of tendons.
Department of Physical and Occupational Therapy, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27511, USA.
Tendon is a highly organized connective tissue joining muscle to bone, capable of resisting high tensile forces while transmitting forces from muscle to bone. The dense, regularly arranged collagenous tissue is made up of fibers, cells of various shapes and ground substance. The mechanical and physiological characteristics of collagen (nearly 85% of the dry weight of tendon) dictate the qualities of tendon. In addition, tendon is flexible so that it can bend at joints, as well as acting as a damping tissue to absorb shock and limit potential damage to muscle (1). Tendon also shows a degree of extensibility. If the strain used to stretch a tendon could be recovered, a beneficial elastic effect would be achieved. Muscles lengthen and shorten in a cyclical manner. During the lengthening period, elastic energy can be stored and used as elastic recoil. For example, the Achilles tendon is stretched late in the stance phase as the triceps surae muscles contract and the ankle dorsiflexes. Prior to plantarflexion, muscle activation ceases and stored energy helps to initiate planter flexion.
Scand J Med Sci Sports.
Department of Anatomy, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.
After maturation tendons undergo many biochemical, cellular, mechanical and pathological changes that bring about a general decline in the structure and function of the tendon. This decline in the aging tendon is characterized by a reduced ability to adapt to environmental stress and loss of tissue homeostasis. The tendon's adaptability to these changes will decide the rate and the success of treatment of a tendon injury. This review examines these changes and also looks at how we can curtail their progression through exercise and lifestyle modification.
Exercise and Physical Fitness - MedlinePlus Health Information
We have examined the number of nerve cells present in the myenteric plexus of the human large intestine using a nonhistochemical method (Giemsa) in laminar preparations of the muscularis externa in two groups of subjects aged 20-35 and over 65 years. The collagen and elastic system related fibers in the myenteric ganglia were also qualitatively evaluated. The total number of neurons decreased in the old subjects by over 37%. The perikaryal area of most of the neurons in both the young and old subjects fell from 101 to 200 microns2. A ganglionic capsule was present and was thicker in the ganglia from the old subjects as were the septa within the ganglia. Both collagen and elastic system fibers were more numerous in the ganglia from the old subjects. We conclude that the decrease in neuron density with age is accompanied by an apparent increase in the fibrous components of the myenteric ganglia.
Aged, 80 and over
Hypertrophy of colonic smooth muscle: structural remodeling, chemical composition, and force output.
The cellular basis of adaptations occurring during the development of megacolon was studied with the lethal spotted mouse model. Age-dependent changes in the length-force characteristics of the colon reach a steady state by 3-4 mo and include an increased relative force development at very short muscle lengths. In megacolon the following occur: 1) structural remodeling expressed as a greater increase in the fraction of maximum force production at short lengths, a shift of optimum length (Lo) to longer lengths, and no change in force per square centimeter; 2) hypertrophy and hyperplasia of both circular and longitudinal muscle; 3) high resting compliance consistent with no disproportionate change in collagen or elastin composition; 4) marked distension so that in situ circumference approximately 1.8 Lo, where active force production is low, and 5) slack length approximately 0.65 Lo, as in normal colon. Biochemical remodeling in megacolon includes disproportionate increases in ATP and phosphocreatine concentration, with 3.5-fold more preformed phosphagen than in normal colon. The myosin concentration is the same in both muscles, but the actin concentration is 1.5-fold greater in megacolon. Most of the cellular changes in megacolon would facilitate high active force output from the muscle at much larger intestinal diameters.
A 17-year-old girl with unilateral congenital glaucoma who had undergone trabeculectomy and peripheral iridectomy in infancy developed apparent exfoliation syndrome (XFS) in the eye that underwent the surgical procedures. A conjunctival biopsy was performed and the specimen was fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, embedded in epoxy resin (Epon-Araldite, Electron Microscopy Sciences, Fort Washington, Pa), and processed for routine electron microscopy and immunostaining for elastin. Results of ultrastructural study showed scattered fibrillar aggregates compatible with those of XFS in an older adult, differing chiefly in sparsity of granular interfibrillar matrix. The XFS fibers were closely associated with elastic fibers and microfibrils. Elastosis of the actinic-aging type was somewhat greater than expected for age. To our knowledge, this is the youngest patient described with characteristic ocular findings of XFS to date, supporting others who have suggested an association between iris surgery in youth and early onset XFS. Electron microscopy was essential in ruling out the possibility of a clinically similar entity caused by ultrastructurally different material.
The effects of trypsin on apoptosis, utriculi size, and skin elasticity in the Rhino mouse.
Acne vulgaris is the result of multifactorial disorders of the pilosebaceous duct. The initial lesion is believed to be hyper-keratinization of the infundibulum. The Rhino mouse has been used as an experimental acne model system for screening anti-keratinizing and comedolytic agents. Using this system we show that trypsin could induce desquamation and utriculi-epidermal differentiation in the absence of irritation. Following five daily trypsin treatments, the biomechanical properties of the mouse skin improved, as demonstrated by cutometer measurements and increased elastin expression. Extensive programmed cell death and apoptosis are demonstrated in the utriculi epithelium of the untreated animals. This cell death is eliminated by the trypsin treatment. We speculate that co-administration of trypsin might increase the therapeutic value of topical acne treatments and improve skin elasticity while reducing irritating effects.
Elastic fiber during development and aging.
Elastin molecules aggregate in the extracellular space where they are crosslinked by stable desmosine bridges. The resulting polymer is structurally organized as branched fibers and lamellae, which, in skin, are wider (a few microns) in the deep dermis and become progressively thinner (fraction of a micron) towards the papillary dermis. Several general and local factors seem to regulate elastin gene expression, deposition and degradation. In skin, the volume density of the elastin network increases from birth up to maturity, when it accounts for about 3-4% of the tissue. However, its amount and distribution depend on dermis areas, which are different among subjects and change with age. Several matrix molecules (glycosaminoglycans, decorin, biglycan, osteopontin) have been found to be associated with elastin into the normal fiber, and several others have been recognized within pathologic elastic fiber (osteonectin, vitronectin, alkaline phosphatase in PXE). With age, and in some pathologic conditions, skin elastin may undergo irreversible structural and compositional changes, which seem to progress from localized deposition of osmiophilic materials to the substitution of the great majority of the amorphous elastin with interwoven filaments negative for elastin specific antibodies.
Impaired synthesis of elastin in walls of aorta and large conduit arteries during early development as an initiating event in pathogenesis of systemic hypertension.
There is much evidence that people who had low birthweight tend to have higher blood pressure in later life. However, the mechanisms that mediate this relation are unknown. We argue that, in fetuses whose growth is impaired, synthesis of elastin in the walls of the aorta and large arteries may be deficient, and that this deficiency would lead to permanent changes in the mechanical properties of these vessels. Over a lifetime, such changes could predispose an individual to higher blood pressure, increased left-ventricular mass, and cardiovascular disease.
Embryonic and Fetal Development*
Permanganate-bisulfite-toluidine blue (PBT) reaction proved to be a highly selective and sensitive method for demonstration of elastic structures in tissue sections. Permanganate oxidation liberates a great amount of aldehyde groups in young and adult elastic fibers both in bovine ligamentum nuchae which can be demonstrated with the bisulfite-toluidine blue (pH = 1.0) staining procedure. There are suggestive evidences that the aldehyde groups are liberated from the desmosine and isodesmosine cross bondings of elastin. The dichroism and the strong birefringence of the elastic fibers induced by the PBT reaction indicate a high degree of linear fibrillar molecular order of the reacting elastin molecules which are assumed to be arranged helically in the aortic elastic fibers and they are assumed to show 2 different micellar textures in ligamentum nuchae fibers as reported with other topo-optical reactions earlier by Romhanyi.
Staining and Labeling
Rabbit aorta organ cultures were used as a model for the study of the modifications of the rate of biosynthesis of intercellular matrix macromolecules with age. Aortas of new born (100 g), young (400 g) and adult (2 kg) rabbits were maintained in culture for several weeks. 14C-lysine is incorporated in all the macromolecular fractions of the aortas, even in polymeric elastin. The change with age of the distribution of proteins of the aorta-explants in successive extracts obtained by a "chemical dissection" procedure and the decrease of their specific radioactivity wtih age enabled us to characterise biochemically the "aging program" of the arterial wall.
Long-term sun exposure can cause major alterations in the papillary dermis, resulting in the deposition of massive amounts of abnormal elastic material, termed solar elastosis. Previous work has demonstrated that this type of photodamage is accompanied by an increase in elastin and fibrillin messenger RNAs and elastin promoter activity.
Our purpose was to develop a rapid and sensitive in vivo method for evaluating compounds offering protection against cutaneous photodamage.
Solar simulating radiation alone resulted in a fivefold increase in elastin promoter activity. Sun protection factors of 2, 4, 8, and 15 yielded a reduction in promoter activity by 2.8%, 42.5%, 58.1%, and 70.3%, respectively.
These results confirm the use of this system as a rapid and sensitive in vivo model for evaluating compounds that protect against photodamage.
Age-related changes in the temporal and spatial distributions of fibrillin and elastin mRNAs and proteins in acute cutaneous wounds of healthy humans.
Elasticity and resilience of the skin are determined largely by the elastin framework, whose microfibrillar scaffold is composed of fibrillin. To date, the spatial and temporal patterns of expression of human elastin and fibrillin during would healing have not been described. Ninety healthy human subjects underwent 4 mm cutaneous punch biopsy wounds from the upper inner arm, which were re-excised from day 3 to 3 months post-wounding. There were marked changes in the patterns of distribution and the amounts of elastin and fibrillin in sun-protected skin with ageing. However, there were no major age-related differences in the mRNA levels for elastin, fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 using in situ hybridization. Elastin and fibrillin appeared in greatest amounts in the wounds of the elderly, particularly in females. A regenerative pattern of elastin and fibrillin arcades at the dermo-epidermal junction was observed in the wounds of aged subjects. mRNA expression of elastin was greatest in the wounds of the aged (from day 3 to day 14 post-wounding) with a similar spatial and temporal pattern to fibrillin-1 expression; this suggests that fibrillin-1 is the major contributor to dermal elastic fibre construction during wound repair. Fibrillin-2 was expressed only in the wounds of the aged and expression was confined to areas proximal to dermal blood vessels. The clear-cut differences in the localization of the two members of the fibrillin family suggest that these have well-defined roles in normal skin and wound tissue. In summary, these data indicate that ageing is associated with increased expression of fibrillin and elastin during acute wound healing and concomitant restoration of the papillary dermal architecture with an improved quality of scarring.
Aged, 80 and over
Exposure to solar UV radiation (UVR) leads to changes in the extracellular matrix of the dermis, which is largely composed of collagen and elastin. Collagen and elastin proteins and their corresponding mRNA were assessed in dorsal skins of hairless mice exposed to 0.64 J/cm2 UVR (295-400 nm), 5 days per week, over a 12 week period. A 48% increase in skin-fold thickness was accompanied by increased elastic tissue deposition and more compressed collagen bundles as assessed histologically. Collagen I mRNA levels were similar to those in control skins at 1, 2, 3 and 6 weeks of UVR and less than control levels at 9 and 12 weeks. Collagen III mRNA levels were elevated after 1 week of UVR, remained elevated for a further 2 weeks and then returned to control levels at weeks 6, 9 and 12 when changes are occurring in collagen I transcripts. There was no evidence of corresponding changes in collagen I and III protein levels assessed using electrophoretic techniques. These results suggest that damage to the extracellular matrix, consequent on UVR, is associated with some pretranslational events. Elastin mRNA levels were unaffected by UVR, suggesting that elastic tissue hyperplasia is a posttranscriptional phenomenon.
The arterial wall structure degenerates with increasing age, elastin fibers decrease while collagen increases. We investigated the elastic properties of the aorta and iliac arteries to determine the relationship between aging and arterial mechanics. The regional elasticity of the aorta and iliac arteries was determined at five different sites in 40 normotensive patients aged 32 to 78 years. A combined procedure for arterial blood pressure measurement and arterial cross-sectional area determination was employed to calculate the parameters of compliance and pulse wave velocity. The descending thoracic and abdominal aorta showed significant correlations between age and elasticity. No correlation was observed at the aortic bifurcation. A significant correlation between age and pulse wave velocity was apparent in the common iliac artery, whereas compliance showed no significant correlation to age. In the external iliac artery as well, no significant correlation between age and elasticity could be found. Arterial elasticity decreases with age, but this process does not progress uniformly at all sites of the arterial system. The difference in elasticity between these basic types of arteries diminishes throughout life. At the aortic bifurcation, mechanical aging seems to proceed faster than at unbifurcated arterial segments.
[Relation between genetic and epigenetic mechanisms in aging].
The recent identification of genes involved in the regulation of the longevity of some invertebrates (drosophila, nematodes) as well as the presence of human genes exhibiting homologies to those identified in invertebrates, revived the deterministic theories of aging. It appears however that those mechanisms which were shown experimentally to be involved in aging in vertebrates and in particular in humans belong to the epigenetic mechanisms such as the Maillard reaction and free radical attack in particular. Some diseases which imitate an accelerated aging as Progeria and the Werner syndrome are due to mutations, some of them mutagenic themselves. Reflections based on such arguments concerning reactions with catalysers coded in the genome but with activities escaping strict control, suggest an indirect determinism of phenomena involved directly in cell- and tissue aging. These considerations are illustrated by the example of the elastin-laminin receptor studied in our laboratory. Its sustained activation by circulating elastin peptides appears to be involved in cell and tissue aging.
Elastins from normal appearing areas of human thoracic aortae with varying degrees of mineralization were taken from subjects of different ages and purified by autoclaving their amino acid compositon, Ca and P contents and N terminal profiles were determined before and after EDTA decalcification. (1) Decrease in desmosine concentration with increasing age was accounted for by dilution of the elastin by autoclave-resistant polar glycoproteins. (2) The appearance and growth of a mineral phase with a Ca/P molar ratio typical of apatites was accompanied by an increased association of polar contaminants with elastin. (3) After 24 h EDTA treatment, small and constant amounts of Ca were still apparent although P was absent, in elastins from all age groups. (4) The undialyzable fraction of the material solubilised by EDTA consisted mainly of elastin fragments, glycoproteins and Ca. (5) All the elastin samples showed the same type of N-terminal amino acids. In low and medium mineralized samples the concentration of amino end-groups was slightly increased, while in highly mineralized elastin the content of N-terminal residues was three times greater than in normal young elastin. Extraction with EDTA reduced the amount of end-groups to a normal level. It is suggested that in the initial stages of elastin fibre mineralization, an increased amount of autoclave-resistant glycoproteins becomes associated with elastin; and that with ageing, degradative changes involving peptide-bond cleavage may occur. However, evidence of degradation is found only in old and highly mineralized elastin samples.
Localization of elastin mRNA and TGF-beta1 in rat aorta and caudal artery as a function of age.
Mandet C
Deslandes F
Several in vitro studies have previously demonstrated that the addition of TGF-beta to aortic smooth muscle cells or skin fibroblasts stimulates elastin synthesis. It is not clear however whether, in vivo, TGF-beta participates in the regulation of elastin synthesis, especially in physiological conditions. The aim of our study was to explore the localization of elastin mRNA and TGF-beta1 in the rat thoracic aorta (an elastic artery) and caudal artery (a muscular artery). Elastin mRNA was localized by in situ hybridization and quantified using Northern blot analysis. TGF-beta1 was detected using immunohistochemistry. The study was carried out as a function of age (rats of 3, 10, 20, and 30 months). We observed that TGF-beta1 immunoreactivity is present predominantly, but not exclusively, at the sites of elastin synthesis as determined by elastin mRNA detection: in smooth muscle cells in the aorta and in endothelial cells in the caudal artery. The ability of exogenously added TGF-beta1 (0.001-10 ng/ml) to modulate the steady-state levels of elastin mRNA in primary cultures of endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts isolated from the thoracic aorta was also studied. At the highest concentration used, elastin mRNA levels increased 5-fold in endothelial cells and 11-fold in smooth muscle cells. The demonstration that TGF-beta1 immunoreactivity is present at the sites of elastin synthesis in the thoracic aorta and in the caudal artery and the observation that TGF-beta1 induces an increase in elastin mRNA levels in cultured endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells suggest that TGF-beta1 may be implicated, at least in part, in the physiological regulation of elastin gene expression.
Aminoguanidine prevents age-related arterial stiffening and cardiac hypertrophy.
Aging is associated with cardiac hypertrophy and arterial stiffening possibly associated with accumulation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). We evaluated the effect of aminoguanidine, an inhibitor of AGE production, on end-stage alterations of renal and cardiovascular systems. Normotensive WAG/Rij rats were treated from 24 to 30 mo with aminoguanidine and compared with a control group. Aminoguanidine did not modify body and kidney weights but prevented the age-related cardiac hypertrophy (heart weight: 1276 +/- 28 mg and 1896 +/- 87 mg in 24- and 30-mo-old control animals and 1267 +/- 60 mg in 30-mo-old treated rats, P &lt; 0.01). The increase in mesangial surface in aging rats was reduced by 30% by aminoguanidine. Collagen content of the arterial wall increased between 24 and 30 mo whereas elastin content, media thickness, and smooth muscle cell number remained unchanged. Aminoguanidine did not affect these parameters; however, the age-related increase in aortic impedance (12.4 +/- 1.4 and 18.2 +/- 1.9 10(3).dyne.sec.cm-5 in control 24- and 30-mo-old rats, P &lt; 0.01) and the decrease in carotid distensibility (0.79 +/- 0.11 and 0.34 +/- 0. 07 mm Hg-1 in control 24- and 30-mo-old rats, P &lt; 0.01) were prevented by aminoguanidine. The prevention of arterial stiffening and cardiac hypertrophy in the absence of changes in collagen and elastin content suggests that the effect of aminoguanidine is related to a decrease in the AGE-induced cross-linking of the extracellular matrix.
A clinical and histological comparison of flashscanning versus pulsed technology in carbon dioxide laser facial skin resurfacing.
We describe a clinical and histological comparison of these two laser technologies in order to determine if there are differences in the outcome.
Twenty-two female patients underwent facial skin resurfacing using the Coherent 5000C UltraPulse CPG on one side of the face and the Sharplan Silk Touch on the contralateral side of the face. The clinical appearances were assessed periodically after treatment and punch biopsies were taken preoperatively and after 7, 21, and 90 days. Tissue was stained with Hematoxylin-Eosin, Masson Trichrom, and with the Verhoeff technique. Histological evaluation was performed on randomized samples taken from the same patient. Epidermis/dermis expression, collagen compaction, and elastin fiber quantity were compared to evaluate if any differences existed.
The side treated by Coherent healed more rapidly and with excellent cosmesis. Greater erythema was observed on the Sharplan side, but had disappeared at the 90-day evaluation. At this time the quality of the results was similar with no particular difference between the sides treated by the Coherent or the Sharplan lasers. At the histological level, although tissue recovered faster on the Coherent side at the 7-day control, at 90 days the collagen was better compacted and organized on the Sharplan side. Similarly, the quantity of the elastin was significantly more enhanced on the Sharplan side.
Irradiated laser energy density in relation to time, and the way that it is delivered, should play an important role at the moment of producing collagen shrinkage. The SilkTouch delivers laser energy more aggressively, thereby producing a more intense inflammatory tissue reaction, which results in slower recovery of tissue, compared with the Coherent CPG. More active enhancement of vascularization found in the Sharplan is likely to be the reason for a more effective collagen proliferation and compaction. These changes, together with the increase in elastin in the dermis, may produce longer lasting effects in skin resurfacing.
Toronto Hospital Research Institute and Department of Pathology, University of Toronto, Canada.
We examined the growth of the right common carotid artery of young rabbits after ligating the left common carotid artery at 3 weeks of age, a procedure that approximately doubled right carotid blood flows. Flow increased from 0.065 +/-0.003 to 0.096+/-0.009 ml/s within 1 h and, at 15 weeks of age, carotid blood flows in experimental animals (0.747+/-0.102 ml/s) were more than double of those of sham-operated control animals (0.334+/-0.053 ml/s). Contralateral carotid ligation resulted in more rapid increases in diameter of the artery with growth in the experimental animals. At 15 weeks of age, the vessel was 15% larger than that of sham-operated controls (2.70+/-0.09 vs. 2.34+/-0.05 mm). This more rapid growth of diameter resulted in shear stresses that were not different from controls despite the higher blood flow rates. Interestingly, however, shear stresses in control arteries fell from 17.4+/-3.4 to 9.19+/-1.16 dyn/cm2 over the experimental period (p &lt; 0.05). Elastin accumulation in the experimental artery was much more rapid than in controls and elastin contents were 49% more than in controls at 15 weeks of age. DNA and collagen contents were not significantly affected by contralateral carotid ligation. Previously, we found that experimental manipulations that decreased flow in the same artery of weanling rabbits substantially affected elastin and DNA accumulation, but had no effect on collagen contents. We conclude that increased blood flow is associated with arterial growth and specifically with accumulation of elastin, a wall constituent that bears much of the wall tension at resting blood pressure, and therefore is a primary determinant of resting vessel dimensions.
Grando SA
Smoking is associated with aberrant cutaneous tissue remodeling, such as precocious skin aging and impaired wound healing. The mechanism is not fully understood. Dermal fibroblasts (DF) are the primary cellular component of the dermis and may provide a target for pathobiologic effects of tobacco products. The purpose of this study was to characterize a mechanism of nicotine (Nic) effects on the growth and tissue remodeling function of DF. We hypothesized that the effects of Nic on DF result from its binding to specific nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) expressed by these cells and that downstream signaling from the receptors alters normal cell functioning, leading to changes in skin homeostasis. Using RT-PCR and Western blotting, we found that a 24-hour exposure of human DF to 10 micro M Nic causes a 1.9- to 28-fold increase of the mRNA and protein levels of the cell cycle regulators p21, cyclin D1, Ki-67, and PCNA and a 1.7- to 2-fold increase of the apoptosis regulators Bcl-2 and caspase 3. Nic exposure also up-regulated expression of the dermal matrix proteins collagen type Ialpha1 and elastin as well as matrix metalloproteinase-1. Mecamylamine (Mec), the specific antagonist of nAChRs, abolished Nic-induced alterations, indicating that they resulted from a pharmacologic stimulation of nAChRs expressed by DF. To establish the relevance of these findings to a specific nicotinergic pathway, we studied human DF transfected with anti-alpha3 antisense oligonucleotides and murine DF from alpha3 nAChR knockout mice. In both cases, lack of alpha3 was associated with alterations in fibroblast growth and function that were opposite to those observed in DF treated with Nic, suggesting that the nicotinic effects on DF were mostly mediated by alpha3 nAChR. In addition to alpha3, the nAChR subunits detected in human DF were alpha5, alpha7, beta2, and beta4. The exposure of DF to Nic altered the relative amounts of each of these subunits, leading to reciprocal changes in [(3)H]epibatidine-binding kinetics. Thus, some of the pathobiologic effects of tobacco products on extracellular matrix turnover in the skin may stem from Nic-induced alterations in the physiologic control of the unfolding of the genetically determined program of growth and the tissue remodeling function of DF as well as alterations in the structure and function of fibroblast nAChRs.
[Properties in elastin of different arteries: cross-links, hydrophobicity and fibronectin in elastin fraction].
In order to evaluate the quantitative and qualitative changes of elastin in different arteries, biochemical properties were measured; that is, elastin content, isodesmosine (ID) as cross-links content, free thiol content (free SH/total SH), hydrophobic properties and coexisting fibronectin (FN) content in elastin fraction from different arteries, correlation coefficients of these properties and these their effect with aging were also calculated. The results from different arteries in regard to changes in elastin can be summarized as follows: 1. The basilar artery in the quantitative changes of elastin. There was no correlation of these parameters in the basial artery from the other arteries. 2. The content of ID in the coronary artery was lower than that of the other arteries. The level of ID was negatively associated with aging, FN, elastin and free SH. On the other hand, the level of free SH was positively associated with aging, cholesterol and FN. 3. The contents of free SH, hydrohobicity and FN in elastin from the arch to the thoracic artery were lower than that of the other arteries. Hydrohobicity was negatively correlated with ID, and FN was positively correlated with cholesterol. 4. In the abdominal artery, FN content was higher than that of other arteries. There was a correlation between FN and free SH. However, free SH was inversely associated with elastin, ID and hydrohobicity.
J-STAGE, Japan Science and Technology Information Aggregator, Electronic
[Studies on the chemical composition of the vascular wall. Collagen and elastin in the walls of human aorta in the course of physiological aging].
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University, St Louis, Mo 63110, USA.
Explants of BM were prepared from 10 human cadaver eyes by removing native RPE. The RPE basal lamina, inner collagenous layer, elastin layer, and outer collagenous layer were exposed by sequentially removing each apical layer by mechanical or enzymatic means. First-passage human RPE was plated onto the surface and the RPE reattachment rate to each layer of BM was determined.
Retinal pigment epithelial cell reattachment was highest to the inner aspects of BM and decreased as deeper layers of BM were exposed (ie, reattachment rate to basal lamina was higher than to the inner collagenous layer, which was higher than to the elastin layer, which was higher than to the outer collagenous layer). The reattachment rate to the inner collagenous layer, elastin layer, and outer collagenous layer harvested from elderly donors (age &gt;60 years) was less than the reattachment rate to corresponding layers harvested from younger (age &lt;50 years) donors.
Retinal pigment epithelial cell reattachment depends on the anatomical layer of BM present in the host tissue. Age-related changes in BM may interfere with RPE reattachment. Our observations may have implications for understanding the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration and its potential treatment with RPE transplantation techniques.
Aged, 80 and over
The term photoageing describes the clinical and histological cutaneous changes that are the consequence of repeated chronic sun exposures and are qualitatively different from those observed in chronological ageing. The connective tissue of the skin is composed mainly of collagen, glycosaminoglycans and elastin and, thus, alterations of these components in photoageing are briefly reviewed in the present article. Collagen changes in photoageing are partly explained by cross-links as well as the unbalanced regulation of collagen production and breakdown. Some visible skin changes can be induced by the consequence of dermal glycosaminoglycans, because the total amount, as well as the composition of the main disaccharide units, is significantly altered in the exposed sites of both aged people and photoaged mice. As for the mechanism of solar elastosis, increased elastin mRNA levels resulting from transcriptional up-regulation of the gene have been reported. Taken together, all components of the dermal connective tissue are affected by chronic actinic damage; however, further in vitro investigation is required to unmask the exact events in photoageing. With regard to this, our novel three-dimensional culture system should be of great help because it mimics the in vivo condition by self producing the extracellular matrices.
Increasing evidence demonstrates that ultraviolet A radiation (UVA) contributes to photoaging, which results in the accumulation of massive amounts of abnormal elastic material in the dermis of photoaged skin. To study UVA-induced photoaging in an in vivo system, we utilized a line of transgenic mice containing the human elastin promoter linked to a chloramphenicol acetyl transferase reporter gene. Our prior work demonstrates promoter activation in response to ultraviolet B radiation (UVB), UVA, and psoralen plus ultraviolet A radiation in the skin of these mice. The addition of psoralen (8-MOP) prior to administration of UVA results in substantial increases in promoter activation, as compared with UVA alone. To demonstrate the utility of these mice as a model of UVA-induced photodamage, we administered four lotions to the skin of our transgenic mice that included: a sunscreen containing octyl methoxycinnamate and benzophenone-3 with a sun protection factor (SPF) of 15, the UVA filter butyl methoxydibenzoylmethane, the SPF 15 sunscreen and the UVA filter together, and the lotion vehicle alone. Following sunscreen administration, mice received a single psoralen plus ultraviolet A radiation treatment. All sunscreens decreased chloramphenicol acetyl transferase activity with the SPF 15 sunscreen, the UVA filter, and the combination SPF 15 sunscreen and UVA filter, resulting in increasing degrees of protection against psoralen plus ultraviolet A radiation. These results demonstrate that this model functions as a rapid and sensitive model of UVA photodamage for the identification and comparison of compounds that protect against UVA-induced photoaging.
Spontaneous rupture of the internal elastic lamina (IEL) occurs in some arteries of the rat during growth and aging. Inbred, normotensive, Brown Norway (BN) rats are particularly susceptible to rupture of the IEL, especially in the abdominal aorta (AA). Preliminary experiments showed that different angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors protect against rupture of the IEL in the BN rat to a greater extent than hydralazine, suggesting a role of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) in this phenomenon. To explore this possibility, we have treated male BN rats from 4.5 to 14 weeks of age with either enalapril or losartan (both at 1, 3, and 10 mg x kg(-1) x d(-1)) or with the calcium antagonists mibefradil (at 3, 10, 30, and 45 mg x kg(-1) x d(-1)) and amlodipine (at 30 mg x kg(-1) x d(-1)). Systolic blood pressure (SBP) was measured weekly, and at the end of treatment we (1) recorded body and heart weights, (2) measured various parameters of the RAS in plasma, (3) quantified interruptions in the IEL on "en face" preparations of AA, and (4) quantified elastin, collagen, and cell proteins in the media of the thoracic aorta. Results showed that enalapril and losartan similarly decrease SBP and rupture of the IEL in the AA, suggesting that enalapril inhibits the latter via a decrease in the production of angiotensin II (Ang II) and not via another effect on ACE. The decrease in IEL rupture and in SBP, as well as the modifications in the parameters of the RAS, were all dose dependent. Mibefradil had little effect on the RAS and, at the highest doses, decreased SBP to an extent similar to that for enalapril at 3 mg x kg(-1) x d(-1) but did not significantly inhibit IEL rupture. Amlodipine decreased SBP, increased plasma renin concentration, and was without effect on IEL rupture. All treatments at the highest doses had a hypotrophic effect on the aortic media but differed in their effects on the heart, with enalapril and losartan decreasing and mibefradil and amlodipine increasing heart weight, suggesting that the inhibition of IEL rupture may be related to a cardiac hypotrophic effect. All these results, taken together, suggest that Ang II plays a role in the rupture of the IEL that is, in part, independent of SBP.
Transcriptional regulation of tropoelastin expression in rat lung fibroblasts: changes with age and hyperoxia.
Elastic fibers are thought to provide structural support for secondary septa as the lung undergoes the transition from the saccular to the alveolar stage. The synthesis of the soluble precursor of elastin, tropoelastin, occurs during a finite developmental period. We have investigated the developmental regulation of tropoelastin gene transcription and mRNA expression in fetal and postnatal rat lung fibroblasts and have assessed the changes in tropoelastin gene expression caused by hyperoxic exposure during secondary septal development. With the use of an RT-PCR assay and intron-specific primers to detect heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA) and intron-spanning primers to detect mRNA in freshly isolated rat lung fibroblasts, tropoelastin gene expression was found to be upregulated late in gestation. From days 18 to 21 of gestation, there was a 4.5-fold increase in tropoelastin hnRNA (P &lt; 0.0001) and a 6-fold increase in mRNA (P = 0.002). After birth, tropoelastin expression was downregulated. Signals decreased from fetal day 21 to postnatal day 2 for both tropoelastin hnRNA (P = 0. 021) and mRNA (P = 0.043). Tropoelastin hnRNA decreased further from days 2 to 6 (P = 0.04). Both tropoelastin hnRNA and mRNA were again upregulated during alveolarization from days 9 to 11, indicating that, once upregulated, transcription of the tropoelastin gene is not constant but varies with fetal and postnatal age. Exposure to &gt;95% oxygen, when initiated on postnatal day 2 or 3 and continued until day 11, significantly diminished the developmental increase in tropoelastin hnRNA (P &lt; 0.005) and mRNA (P &lt; 0.05) normally seen on days 9-11, indicating that the postnatal upregulation of tropoelastin gene expression is inhibited by hyperoxic exposure in the early postnatal period.
In the growing chick a marked stimulation in soluble and mature arterial elastin synthesis occurs 2 and 5 weeks after hatching. Measurement of [3H]valine and [3H]proline incorporation into arterial soluble protein during this period indicated that most of the label is found in a 70 000 dalton protein subunit. The labeled soluble subunit had the characteristics of native soluble elastin or tropoelastin. During the period in which the greatest percentage increase in mature elastin occurs, the highest specific activities of soluble [3H]valine-labeled protein were observed. These changes were striking and suggest a developmental period for the growing chick in which factors related to elastin metabolism may be more easily studied.
Morphology and relationship to extensibility curves of human mitral valve chordae tendineae.
Human mitral valve chordae tendineae in which elastic response curves are nonlinear have also been found to exhibit extensibility that increases with chordal size and decreases with chordal age. We used selective enzymatic digestion and scanning transmission electron microscopy to explain these observations. Removal of the outer elastin sheath by enzymatic digestion did not significantly affect the elastic response of this tissue. Scanning electron microscopy revealed that the collagen fibers in the central core of young chordae exhibited a very wavy pattern but the pattern in adult specimens was relatively straight. The increased waviness accounted for the greater extensibility of the young specimens. The collagen fibers from young and old chordae consisted of a network of collagen fibrils that became more collapsed when the tissue was fixed under tension. This network arrangement of the fibrils explains the nonlinearity in the elastic response of the tissue. Transmission electron micrographs showed that the density of collagen fibrils decreased as chordal size increased. The number of fibrils per 10(-8) cm2 of the central core decreased from 182.4 (SE = 1.3) to 131.3 (SE = 1.6) as average chordal cross-sectional area increased from 0.0016 cm2 to 0.0268 cm2. This difference in fibril density provides an explanation for the greater extensibility shown by the thicker chordae. The collagen fibril diameters ranged from 516 A to 552 A.
[A morphological study to elucidate the differences in visceral pleura in young and old mice].
The pleura is not only a mechanical envelope for the lung but also represents a crossroad for the exchange of cells and fluids. We studied ultrastructural differences in the visceral pleura of male mice in a young age group (aged 1 day, 1 week (wk), 2 wks) and an old age group (10 months (mos), 16 mos, 18 mos, 28 mos, and 30 mos), by both scanning and transmission electron microscopy. Surface microvilli (SMV) of mesothelial cells appeared to be sparse at day 1, then gradually increased in density and reached a plateau at approximately 10 mos. The length of the SMV changed in parallel with density which was confirmed by a morphometric study. After 28 mos, the SMV was partially loose, with an irregular and thin appearance. The morphological properties of pleural connective tissues, including collagen, elastin, and fibroblasts, changed in morphology with the changes in mesothelial cells; the elastic layer beneath mesothelial cells formed at 2wks and was maintained until 28 mos; collagen bundles increased in volume density throughout life, whereas cellular components including mesothelial cells, fibroblasts, and alveolar epithelial cells became atrophic with aging. From these observations, we concluded that although SMV do not have any known functions in the pleura, they change with age in a manner that likely corresponds to the changes in pleural connective tissue as well as structural changes in lung parenchyma.
Changes related to age and cerebrovascular symptoms in the extracellular matrix of human carotid plaques.
Fernandes e Fernandes J
Thirty atherosclerotic carotid plaques were removed by endarterectomy from 27 patients and divided into 2 groups on the basis of the presence of ipsilateral symptoms. The plaques were homogenized, and the total levels of the major components of the extracellular matrix were determined.
Plaques associated with symptoms were characterized by increased levels of elastin (1.58+/-0.46 versus 1.24+/-0.40 mg/g wet wt; P=0.03) and decreased levels of hydroxyapatite (45.1+/-46.3 versus 131.4+/-111.7 mg/g wet wt; P=0.02) compared with asymptomatic plaques. The increase in elastin in plaques from symptomatic patients was due to elevated levels of an intermediate-size fraction, as determined by liquid chromatography. Collagen and sulfated glycosaminoglycans were present in equal amounts in both groups. Elastin content in carotid plaques decreased with age.
Carotid plaques from symptomatic patients have lower levels of hydroxyapatite than those from asymptomatic patients. The present study also raises the possibility that non-cross-linked forms of elastin, increased in plaques associated with symptoms, could be a marker of plaque vulnerability and/or directly induce harmful cellular activities or increase lipoprotein retention in the vascular wall.
Institute of Biology and Chemistry of Proteins, CNRS UPR 412, Lyon, France. biocell@ibcp.fr
Ageing is marked by ultrastructural and functional changes in most tissues. In part, these changes are caused by a loss of elasticity in the elastic fibers of the extracellular matrix. These fibers are composed of the protein elastin associated with microfibrils of 8 to 12 nm in diameter. Microfibrils contain fibrillins as major constituents. Mutations in fibrillin genes are considered as primary causes of Marfan syndrome, a genetic disorder with pathological manifestations in the cardiovascular and skeletal systems, in addition to dysfunctions in the eye. Fibrillin is also the major protein of the ciliary zonule fibers. During ageing, these fibers become more fragile, and concomitantly, an increased risk for ocular pathologies is observed. We have investigated structural modifications in fibrillin-rich microfibrils during ageing of human ciliary zonule. Observations using light microscopy and transmission electron microscopy after rotary shadowing allowed us to describe the organization of the zonule fibers and their insertion into the ciliary body. Our results emphasize qualitative differences between young and old zonules, which are likely due to modifications in the structure of microfibrils.
Aged, 80 and over
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College, and Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107-5541, USA.
Cutaneous aging is a complex biological phenomenon consisting of two distinct components, (a) the intrinsic, genetically determined degenerative aging processes and (b) extrinsic aging due to exposure to the environment, also known as "photoaging". These two processes are superimposed in the sun-exposed areas of skin, with profound effects on the biology of cellular and structural elements of the skin. This overview summarizes our current understanding of the mechanisms of innate versus extrinsic aging with emphasis on connective tissue alterations, primarily collagen and the elastic fiber network. We also introduce a novel transgenic mouse model, expressing a human elastin promoter-reporter gene construct, suitable for studies on biology and preventive pharmacology of the cutaneous aging.
Collagen and elastin fibres are of major importance in providing the aorta with tensile strength and elasticity. The presence of cross-links in collagen and elastin is essential for the mechanical stability of collagen and elastin fibres. beta-aminopropionitrile (BAPN) reduces the formation of cross-links by inhibiting the enzyme lysyloxidase. Young rats were injected with BAPN to inhibit the formation of cross-links, and the changes in the biomechanical and biochemical properties of the thoracic aorta were studied. The biomechanical analyses of aortic samples from BAPN-treated rats showed a significantly increased diameter (1.64 +/-0.02 mm), a significantly reduced maximum load (1.08+/-0.08 N), and a significantly reduced maximum stiffness (3.34+/-0.10 N) compared with controls (1.57+/-0.02 mm, 1.55+/-0.04 N and 4.49 +/-0.14 N, respectively). No changes in the concentrations of collagen and elastin were found. The content of pyridinoline, a mature collagen cross-link, was significantly decreased by 49% in the BAPN-treated group compared with controls. No changes in the concentration of desmosine + isodesmosine, the major cross-links of elastin. were found. The present study shows that cross-links are essential in providing mechanical stability of the aorta. Even a partial inhibition of the cross-linking processes results in a destabilisation of the aortic wall with increased diameter and reduced strength and stiffness.
Large artery remodeling during aging: biaxial passive and active stiffness.
From the Department of Internal Medicine, Veterans Administration Medical Center and University Heart Center, Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, Ariz, USA.
To examine arterial mechanical changes during aging, pressure-radius and axial force-radius curves were measured in vivo in carotid arteries from 6- and 23-month-old Brown Norway X Fischer 344 rats. Incremental passive circumferential stiffness (measured at 50, 100, and 200 mm Hg) was higher (P&lt;0.01) in the 23- compared with the 6-month-old rats (14.02+/-1.23 versus 6.58+/-1.51; 2.68+/-0.56 versus 0.99+/-0.34; 1.10+/-0.24 versus 0.69+/-0.15 dyne/mm2x10(3), respectively). Incremental passive axial stiffness was increased (P&lt;0.01) in the 23- compared with the 6-month-old rats (7.95+/-0.70 versus 4.24+/-0.81; 1.91+/-0.10 versus 0.61+/-0.16; 0.58+/-0.09 versus 0.36+/-0.06 dyne/mm2x10(3), respectively). Active incremental circumferential arterial stiffness at 100 and 200 mm Hg was increased (P&lt;0.01) in the older rats. In 6-month-old rats, activation of vascular smooth muscle enhanced (P&lt;0.01) the incremental circumferential and axial stiffness measured at 200 mm Hg. In 23-month-old rats, only active incremental stiffness was increased (P&lt;0.01) at 200 mm Hg. Aging increased (P&lt;0.05) media thickness, collagen content, and the collagen/elastin ratio by 12%, 21%, and 38%, respectively. Elastin density and the number of smooth muscle cell nuclei were decreased by 20% and 31%, respectively, with aging. Thus, structural alterations that occur with aging are associated with changes in both active and passive stiffness. Vascular smooth muscle tone modulates arterial wall anisotropy differently during aging.
Genetics, aging, and the heart.
Heart disease remains the most frequent cause of death in the general population and is intimately related to aging. Either extreme premature aging or marked longevity may be monogenic, but in most humans aging is a complex polygenic phenomenon. Hypercholesterolemia and hypertension are important factors. Cardiac amyloidosis and vascular elastin degradation may be separate factors. Humans with the greatest longevity are relatively refractory to atherosclerosis. Frequencies of heart deaths among relatives of a heart-death proband without dyslipoproteinemia conform to expectations of a polygenic trait. Careful, attentive medical management of major environmental factors and of heart senescence can result in more successful aging.
Laser resurfacing has gained wide acceptance for the treatment of actinic facial skin. However, postoperative care of the face is reasonably complicated and prolonged erythema is common. To simplify the postoperative care and to possibly reduce the duration of the erythema, we investigated a laser treatment that spares the epithelium.
A 980 nm diode laser was used with a spherical optic handpiece to focus the light in the dermis. We treated in vitro breast and facial skin and measured the tissue shrinkage and the histological changes. We also treated two patients and harvested the tissue after 6 and 21 days of wound healing.
The diode laser treatment does not ablate the epidermis. The tissue shows shrinkage (16% at 8W) similar to three passes of the scanned carbon dioxide laser treatment (15%). Thermal damage in the dermis is similar to the residual damage left after laser resurfacing with the scanned carbon dioxide laser. After 21 days the tissue shows new collagen and an abundance of young elastin fibers.
Effector functions of the elastin receptor on human phagocytic cells from young and older individuals were studied. In cells of young healthy subjects the elastin peptides, the agonists of receptor, stimulated both superoxide anion release from PMNs and phagocytosis of coated human red cells by monocytes. Elastin appeared to inhibit the cholesterol synthesis in monocytes, measured by the incorporation of 14C-acetate. In comparison with phagocytic cells of young (&lt; or = 25 +/- 6 years) subjects. PMNs of elderly donors (&gt; or = 75 +/- 10 years) bore a similar number of binding sites for soluble elastin peptides, and the affinity of the elastin receptor was unchanged as shown by Scatchard analysis. The phagocytosis of coated human red cells stimulated by elastin peptides was also similar in the two age groups. However, several differences were found between phagocytic cells of young and elderly donors 1) PMNs of elderly released increased amounts of elastase from both resting and elastin peptide stimulated cells, and 2) monocytes of elderly showed a lack of inhibition of cholesterol synthesis by elastin peptides when maintained in cholesterol-free medium. These changes in effector functions of phagocytic cells from elderly donors might contribute to the age-dependent increase of susceptibility to the development of atherosclerotic lesions.
Neutrophils and low-grade inflammation in the seemingly normal aging human lung.
Lung function deteriorates with age and is associated with elastin loss, loss of elastic recoil and decline in diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide. To determine whether increased numbers of neutrophils can be found in the lower respiratory tract in healthy, clinically normal individuals who are more advanced in age, we performed bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) on individuals in three discontinuous age groups (Group I, 19-36 years; Group II, 45-55 years; Group III, 64 83 years). We found that neutrophils were increased in many individuals in Group III compared to Group I. The neutrophil cell differential count was 1.44+/-0.18% (mean+/-S.E.M.) for Group I versus 3.88+/-0.81% for Group III (P &lt; 0.01) and neutrophils x 10(3)/ml BAL fluid was 1.7+/-0.2 versus 7.2+/-1.7 for Group I versus Group III, respectively (P &lt; 0.01). Similarly, interleukin-8 (IL-8) (8.5+/-1.7 vs 36.8+/-9.4 pg/ml, P &lt; 0.01) and neutrophil elastase (NE) complexed to alpha1-antiprotease (1.2+/-0.1 vs 16.6+/-7.1 ng/ml, P &lt; 0.02) were significantly elevated in the oldest versus youngest age group, although alpha1-antiprotease (582+/-86 vs 1178+/-148 ng/ml, P &lt; 0.01) and elastase inhibitory capacity (EIC) (8.1+/-1.3 vs 17.7+/-1.9 micromol/ml, P &lt; 0.01) were also significantly increased in the oldest age group. This cross-sectional investigation suggests that low-grade inflammation exists in the air spaces of many clinically normal, older individuals.
Aged, 80 and over
Centre de Recherche Bioclinique sur le Vieillissement, Groupe Hospitalier Charles Foix-Jean Rostand, Ivry-sur-Seine, et Laboratoire de Recherche Ophthalmologique, Hôtel-Dieu, Paris, France. instderm@club-internet.fr
Aging of connective tissues is important for the understanding of aging mechanisms of tissues rich in extracellular matrix and of age-dependent diseases often affecting such tissues. Aging mechanisms of such tissues can be divided as follows: (1) age-dependent modifications of matrix biosynthesis; (2) postsynthetic modifications of extracellular matrix, and (3) modifications of cell-matrix interactions. Examples are discussed for all three aspects of tissue aging, with special emphasis on the role of epigenetic reactions. These reactions include the Maillard reaction, uncontrolled proteolytic degradation, and free radical release. Proteolytic fragments of fibronectin and of elastic fibers were shown to produce noxious effects and to be engaged in vicious circles of autoentertained and self-amplified mechanisms. We studied in particular the role of the elastin-laminin receptor in tissue aging and in atherogenesis. The presence of saturating concentrations of elastin peptides in the circulation results in a chronic overstimulation of the receptor with sustained free radical and lytic enzyme production. Other examples of age-dependent uncoupling of receptors also illustrate the importance of altered receptor function in tissue aging and related pathologies.
Aging and matrix biology.
This introduction to a theme issue of Pathologie Biologie on the extracellular matrix starts with a brief overview of the advances made over the last few years and of the increasing specialization they have resulted in. A review is then presented of cell-matrix interactions, with emphasis on those mediated by the elastin-laminin receptor during physiologic processes and during aging and age-related diseases. The activated human lymphocyte expressing the elastin-laminin receptor is used as an example. When exposed to low levels of elastin peptides (kappa-elastin, 75 kappa D, 1-10 micrograms/ml, i.e., 1.4 to 14.10(-8)M), this receptor mediates increases in cell growth and in the production of serine-elastase. Levels of about 100 micrograms/ml are associated with cell death due to necrosis and to apoptosis. This example illustrates the key role played by epigenetic phenomena in aging of cells and tissues.
Integrins are heterodimeric cell-surface proteins that regulate cell growth, migration and survival. We have shown previously that the epithelial-restricted integrin alpha(v)beta6 has another critical function; that is, it binds and activates latent transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta). Through a global analysis of pulmonary gene expression in the lungs of mice lacking this integrin (Itgb6 null mice) we have identified a marked induction of macrophage metalloelastase (Mmp12)--a metalloproteinase that preferentially degrades elastin and has been implicated in the chronic lung disease emphysema. Here we report that Itgb6-null mice develop age-related emphysema that is completely abrogated either by transgenic expression of versions of the beta6 integrin subunit that support TGF-beta activation, or by the loss of Mmp12. Furthermore, we show that the effects of Itgb6 deletion are overcome by simultaneous transgenic expression of active TGF-beta1. We have uncovered a pathway in which the loss of integrin-mediated activation of latent TGF-beta causes age-dependent pulmonary emphysema through alterations of macrophage Mmp12 expression. Furthermore, we show that a functional alteration in the TGF-beta activation pathway affects susceptibility to this disease.
Atherosclerosis is clearly one of the most life-threatening diseases and a major cause of morbidity and mortality in industrialized countries. Typical arterial lesions contain both cells originating from the blood (monocytes/macrophages) and locally-recruited smooth muscle cells. The structure of the artery is profoundly disrupted. Degradation of arterial elastin fibers results in loss of elasticity, and several elastin peptides are released that can interact with various cells via an increasingly well-characterized elastin receptor. Elastin receptor-mediated reactions that are of obvious physiologic importance include vasodilating effects and induction of mesenchymal cell adhesion to elastin fibers. Other effects are potentially harmful, such as increased elastase production, free radical release, induction of LDL oxidation, and stimulation of endogenous cholesterol production. These deleterious effects become predominant during aging as a result of chronic exposure of the elastin receptor to circulating elastin peptides. This review describes the results of recent investigations into the biological effects of elastin peptides.
[Aging of arterial extracellular matrix elastin: etiology and consequences].
This review discusses the hypothesis that the accumulation with advancing age of physical insults to the arterial wall (pressure, flow, diameter) may induce fragmentation of the medial elastic network, thereby leading to cardiovascular dysfunction. Physical factors have been shown to alter medial cell activity, inducing medial hypertrophy and other changes. Their potential contribution to changes in extracellular matrix proteins (perhaps mediated by integrins) has been less extensively studied. A metabolic factor may also be involved in age-related elastic fiber fragmentation. Oxidative stress in the arterial wall increases with age and leads to an increase in the production of cytokines, which stimulate the activity of elastases. Changes in elastic fiber composition may be associated with a greater propensity for calcification. Elastic fiber architecture can be modified by three reactions, namely elastolysis, elastocalcinosis, and production of new elastin fibers. These changes in the elastic network may have a number of consequences. Dilatation may shift strain to collagen, resulting in increases in the elastic modulus and impedance of the arterial wall. In turn, these changes may modify ventricle-artery coupling, leading to left ventricular hypertrophy (an independent risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in elderly individuals). The increase in arterial wall elastic modulus associated with arteriosclerosis, together with arterial dilatation and flow profile changes, may also increase the susceptibility of the arterial wall to atheroma lesions.
Evaluation of alveolar development beyond the postnatal period of rapid septation has generally involved alveolar counting. We used an alternate approach to assess postseptation parenchymal development: measurement of the lengths of various types of alveolar septal borders. This technique directly addresses changes in the elastin fiber network that determines parenchymal complexity. Lungs from weanling and adult ferrets, inflated to 15 cmH2O, were perfusion fixed and dehydrated, and 2-micrometer sections were stained with Miller's elastin stain for light microscopy. We used standard morphometric methods to measure the lengths of the various types of alveolar septal borders. Three types comprised &gt;90% of all septal borders: 1) free septal ends ("ends") containing an elastin cable; 2) angled meetings of two alveolar septa ("bends"), also with a cable; and 3) the near-symmetrical intersections of three septa ("junctions") devoid of elastin. When scaled for lung volume, ends and bends were 23 and 37% greater in adults (P &lt; 0.001), reflecting the increase in parenchymal complexity with growth. The 17% difference in scaled junction lengths was not significant (P = 0.10). Bends increased out of proportion to the increase in ends, and both bends and ends increased to a greater degree than any possible increase in junctions (P &lt; 0.001 for all comparisons). Although the interpretation of changes in the distribution of alveolar border lengths is not straightforward, an increase in bends resulting in an increase in the complexity of individual alveoli may contribute to the increase in alveolar gas-exchanging surface area with growth. Septation, the process responsible for the rapid early postnatal increase in parenchymal complexity in many species, should tend to increase the lengths of ends and junctions and decrease the lengths of bends. Therefore, these data suggest that septation is not the predominant mechanism of later postnatal parenchymal development in the ferret.
Effect of in vitro aging on the modulation of protein and fibronectin biosynthesis by the elastin-laminin receptor in human skin fibroblasts.
The 67-kD elastin-laminin receptor (ELR) subunit which carries the recognition site for elastin peptides (EP) is a lectin. Its binding with galactosides can modulate the kinetics of its interaction with its ligand, EP. In this study the biosynthesis of proteins, collagen and fibronectin were evaluated in the presence of agonists and antagonists of the receptor on human skin fibroblasts. The biosynthesis of total proteins determined by 3H-proline incorporation and of fibronectin (by immunoprecipitation) were shown to increase with passage number. The presence of 1 microg/ml kappa-elastin (EP) in the culture medium increased both total proteins and fibronectin biosynthesis. Melibiose, an agonist of the receptor at 5 microg/ml (140 microM), decreased both proteins and fibronectin biosynthesis in the culture medium of human skin fibroblast at the 10th and 15th passage. These results show that the ELR can control the biosynthetic mechanisms of some of the macromolecular constituents of extracellular matrix such as fibronectin and moderate its age and passage-dependent upregulation.
Université Paris 6, Centre de Recherche Bioclinique sur le Vieillissement, Groupe Hospitalier Charles Foix-Jean Rostand, Ivry sur Seine, France. 106517.545@compuserve.com
This review proposes reinvestigation of a topic studied in the author's laboratory over the last decades concerning the age-dependent modifications of the vascular extracellular matrix (ECM) as related to atherogenesis and its recognized risk-factors: blood lipids, lipoproteins. Most salient previous results are confronted with recent publications in this field. Age-dependent modifications of the vascular wall discussed in this review include upregulation of elastolytic enzymes, demonstrated for the first time in the vascular wall in this laboratory, matrix biosynthesis and receptor function. The progressive deposition of lipids in elastic tissues as well as the addition of lipoproteins or lipids to cell and organ cultures were shown to modify matrix biosynthesis and upregulate elastase expression. Lipid-elastin interactions exhibit a great deal of specificity as shown by the nature and amount of lipids accumulating in elastin in vivo and in vitro. Recent epidemiological studies (the EVA study) enables the confrontation of blood lipid parameters with matrix related components (serum elastase and inhibitors, elastin peptides, fibronectin) in the same blood samples. The elastin laminin receptor present on vascular cells was shown to trigger NO dependent vasodilation, and downregulation of cholesterol synthesis. Both of these functions decrease or disappear with age except the upregulation of elastase release which is preserved and increased. Recent experiments extended these findings to T-lymphocytes present also in the atherosclerotic plaque. Finally several recent publications are analyzed which give more precision on the cellular mechanisms underlying the above-described modifications.
Cardiovascular abnormalities in ageing and in uraemia--only analogy or shared pathomechanisms?
The analogies between the effects of ageing and of uraemia on the function and the structure of central elastic arteries and of the heart are striking. Qualitatively similar changes are seen in pulse contour, pulse wave velocity, and impedance and also similar structural abnormalities with wall thickening, diminished elastin, and increased collagen content. The altered 'Windkessel' function of central arteries in age and uraemia is one factor contributing to left ventricular hypertrophy.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) represent a potentially lethal disorder associated with aging and atherosclerosis. Although current management of AAA is predicted on early detection and elective surgical repair, routine screening for AAA is infrequent, because most AAA are too small to warrant repair when first detected and because there are no therapeutic approaches proven to suppress aneurysm expansion. Basic research on this problem suggests that chronic inflammation and increased local production of elastin-degrading proteinases play prominent roles in the process of aneurysmal degeneration. Members of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) family appear to be the most prominent elastases produced in human AAA, suggesting that unique therapeutic targets might exist for aneurysm disease. Studies using a representative animal model for AAA support this view, providing a means for further development of pharmacological approaches to suppress aneurysm expansion. Indeed, recent work indicates that tetracycline derivatives have the potential to interrupt the progressive connective tissue destruction that occurs in AAA, by virtue of their non-antimicrobial properties as MMP inhibitors, and they do so at clinically achievable dose schedules. These findings support the view that MMPs are potentially important pharmacotherapeutic targets in AAA and, moreover, that tetracyclines might be useful in suppressing aneurysm expansion in vivo. Because tetracycline derivatives offer a number of distinct advantages as MMP inhibitors for patients with small AAA, prospective clinical trials of this novel therapeutic strategy can be anticipated in the near future.
The Jefferson Center for Dermatopathology, Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Degenerative changes of elastin, increase of collagen fibres, proliferation of muscle cells and impairment in endothelium function occurs in the vessel wall with ageing, in hypertensive and others diseases. Early changes are potentially reversible. Atherosclerosis is a late stage of pathologies occurring in the arterial wall in response to various factors. The present paper describes current knowledge on mechanisms of arterial wall remodelling. The authors define basic indices of arterial compliance and describe several physiological and pathological factors which occur play the main role in process of arterial wall remodelling. A chapter is devoted to the effects of increased arterial stiffness on heart pathology and clinical implications of measuring these parameters.
Association between smoking and hair loss: another opportunity for health education against smoking?
Besides being the single most preventable cause of significant morbidity and an important cause of death in the general population, tobacco smoking has been associated with adverse effects on the skin. Smoke-induced premature skin ageing has attracted the attention of the medical community, while only recently an observational study has indicated a significant relationship between smoking and baldness. The mechanisms by which smoking causes hair loss are multifactorial and are probably related to effects of cigarette smoke on the microvasculature of the dermal hair papilla, smoke genotoxicants causing damage to DNA of the hair follicle, smoke-induced imbalance in the follicular protease/antiprotease systems controlling tissue remodeling during the hair growth cycle, pro-oxidant effects of smoking leading to the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines resulting in follicular micro-inflammation and fibrosis and finally increased hydroxylation of oestradiol as well as inhibition of the enzyme aromatase creating a relative hypo-oestrogenic state. In view of the psychological impact of androgenetic alopecia on affected men and women, increasing public awareness of the association between smoking and hair loss offers an opportunity for health education against smoking that may be more effective than the link between smoking and facial wrinkles or grey hair, since the latter can be effectively counteracted by current aesthetic dermatologic procedures, while treatment options for androgenetic alopecia are limited.
S. Karger AG, Basel, Switzerland
androgenetic alopecia - Genetics Home Reference
The yellow ligaments of the spine are characterized by an exceptionally high content of elastin, a protein with a proved longevity in several human tissues. This unique biochemical composition suggested a suitability of yellow ligaments for age estimation based on aspartic acid racemization (AAR), which was tested by determination of AAR in total tissue specimens and in purified elastin from yellow ligaments of individuals of known age. AAR was found to increase with age in both sample sets. The purified elastin samples exhibited a much faster kinetics than the total tissue, with ca. 3.7-4.6-fold higher apparent rates. The relationship between AAR and age was much closer in the purified elastin samples ( r=0.96-0.99) and it can therefore be used as a basis for biochemical age estimation. The analysis of total tissue samples cannot be recommended since the AAR values can be strongly influenced even by slight, histologically non-detectable variations in the collagen content. Age estimation based on AAR in purified elastin from yellow ligaments may be a valuable additional tool in the identification of unidentified cadavers, especially in cases where other methods cannot be applied (e.g. no available teeth, body parts).
Aged, 80 and over
Age-associated changes in elastin and collagen content and the proportion of types I and III collagen in the lungs of mice.
We investigated the effect of aging on the extracellular matrix of the lungs by examining age-associated changes in the elastin and collagen content, and the proportion of types I and III collagen, in the whole lungs of BALB/c and SAMR1 male mice between the ages of 3 and 24 months. The elastin content was determined by the hot alkali method. The hydroxyproline content was measured and assessed to be the collagen content. The relative proportion of types I and III collagen was assessed by cyanogen bromide digestion, followed by separation of the resultant peptides by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The elastin content did not change significantly with age in either strain of mice. The total collagen content of the whole lung was significantly higher at 24 months of age, although there were no significant changes with aging in the hydroxyproline content per dry lung weight nor in the proportion of type III to type I collagen. We conclude that in terms of the extracellular matrix, the lungs of aged mice are not very different in feature from the lungs of younger mice, and this is probably the simple consequence of growth of the lungs of young mice.
The mechanisms of aging have been intensively studied since the middle of the last century on cellular and molecular level in experimental studies, case reports and epidemiological estimations. They have also generated a number of speculations and over 300 theories.
However, it appears more and more clearly that epigenetic mechanisms (escaping direct genetic control) would be more directly implied in the decline of physiological functions with age. Several examples of such mechanisms are discussed and may be attributed to "negligence of nature' during the development of multicellular eukaryotic organisms. However, their very nature makes it possible to propose specific therapeutic interventions in order to slow down the effects of such mechanisms indirectly coded in the genome.
Aged, 80 and over
Heart disease is directly associated with aging as well as progression of atherosclerosis. The vessels begin to stiffen with age. It is speculated that the increase in stiffness can occur as a result of either increase progression of atherosclerosis or possibly due to the deterioration of the elastic components of the arterial wall. Regardless of the mechanism, an increase in vessel stiffness can lead to significant increase in the pathophysiological progression of the disease. The overall objectives of this investigation were to evaluate the coronary artery obtained from cadavers in their 7th, 8th and 9th of life and characterized the level of atherosclerosis and to identify using special elastin staining techniques the involvement of fiber disruption in atherosclerosis. The coronary arteries were obtained from cadaveric donors at the University of Saskatoon (average age 81.7 years, range 77-92 years of age). The arteries were fixed, sectioned and stained for routine analysis as well as with an Elastin staining protocol. The arteries were screened and the level of atherosclerosis was measured as well as thickness changes within the arteries. Digital imaging was used to capture the areas of elastin disruption. The overall results suggest elastin disruption occurs as the atherosclerotic plaque progresses. The imaging system in conjunction with elastin staining allows for a very sensitive method to analyze the tissue for the progression of pathophysiological disease mechanisms.
Aged, 80 and over
Morphology of aging lung in F344/N rat: alveolar size, connective tissue, and smooth muscle cell markers.
This study investigated the morphological changes of lungs in F344/N rats (9-36 months old). We initially examined general and quantitative morphological changes, and then we used immunohistochemistry to detect distributional changes in collagen subtypes (types I, III, and IV) and smooth muscle cell (SMC) markers (alpha-smooth muscle actin (ASMA), gamma-smooth muscle actin (GSMA), desmin, and vimentin) in the lungs. In 24-month-old rats, alveolar ducts and alveolar sacs were enlarged, and alveoli were wider and shallower than in younger animals. In old rats (&gt;/=27 months), terminal and respiratory bronchioles and alveolar ducts were dilated and alveoli were more extended than in 24-month-old rats. No age-related distributional changes were observed for collagen types I, III, and IV as revealed by immunohistochemistry, or elastin as revealed by resorsin fuchsin. SMCs in the extra- and intrapulmonary bronchi were immunoreactive for ASMA, GSMA, and desmin, but not for vimentin at all ages. In old rats (&gt;/=27 months), SMCs were loosely arranged in comparison with younger animals, and stainability for GSMA and desmin was decreased. In the respiratory bronchioles and alveolar ducts, a few cells immunoreactive for ASMA and vimentin were observed in the smooth muscle aggregations of the alveolar orifice in rats younger than 12 months. In older rats (&gt;20 months), cells immunoreactive for ASMA and vimentin were increased in septal tips. In conclusion, extension of distal airways and immunohistochemical changes of SMC markers in F344/N rat lungs were evident by approximately 24 months of age, but there was no apparent change in connective tissue morphology.
Corrosion casts of the pulmonary trunk and major branches of the pulmonary arteries of 39 rabbits were made from a silicone polymer. In half of the rabbits the casts were made with the lungs expanded and half with the lungs collapsed. The length of various segments of the casts were measured from magnified photographs. It was found that in rabbits less than 23 days old the pulmonary trunk is significantly longer when the lungs are expanded than when they are collapsed. This suggests that a repeated longitudinal extension  of the vessel occurs during breathing. This effect disappears after 30 days of age, possibly because of elastin fragmentation. Between the ages of 23 and 30 days the growth  in length and diameter of the pulmonary trunk undergoes a rapid acceleration. This may also be the result of elastin fragmentation. Whereas it may be that repeated longitudinal stress in the pulmonary trunk during breathing causes elastin in its media to fragment, one cannot exclude the possibility that other factors such as growth are responsible.
Histomorphometric, biochemical and ultrastructural changes in the aorta of salt-loaded stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats fed a Japanese-style diet.
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Section of General Pathology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via Campi 287, 41100 Modena, Italy.
It is demonstrated that dietary habits play a role in cardiovascular diseases. In stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRsp), concomitant salt loading and a Japanese-style diet greatly accelerate hypertension and the appearance of cerebrovascular lesions by directly damaging arterial vessels. A number of studies have characterised medium and small vessel lesions in SHRsp, but little attention has been paid to the changes in the wall structure of large arteries induced by exposure to a salt-enriched diet. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of a Japanese-style diet and salt loading on the thoracic aorta.
Two-month-old SHRsp were kept on a Japanese-style diet with 1% sodium chloride solution replacing tap water. Two months later, they were sacrificed and compared with age-matched or two-month-old control SHRsp kept on a standard diet and tap water in terms of the histomorphometry, ultrastructure and biochemical composition of the thoracic aorta. The vessel was consistently thicker in the four-month-old SHRsp (+20%, p &lt; 0.05 vs two-month-old rats) regardless of diet. The salt-loaded SHRsp showed a significant reduction in elastic fibre density (-20%, p &lt; 0.05 vs two-month-old rats) and an increase in the other matrix components (%), whereas the four-month-old controls showed preserved elastic fibres and a significant increase in the other matrix components (+65%, p &lt; 0.05 vs two-month-old rats). There was a considerable increase in the amounts of 4-OH-proline (+147%), 5-OH-lysine (+174%) and desmosines (+360%) in the four-month-old controls vs their two-month-old counterparts (p &lt; 0.01), but not in the salt-loaded animals. Ultrastructural analysis revealed clear damage and accelerated aging in the thoracic aorta of the salt-loaded SHRsp.
Salt loading and a Japanese-style diet destabilize thoracic aorta architecture in SHRsp after two months of treatment.
Predominant effects of Polypodium leucotomos on membrane integrity, lipid peroxidation, and expression of elastin and matrixmetalloproteinase-1 in ultraviolet radiation exposed fibroblasts, and keratinocytes.
Departments of Biology and Chemistry/Biochemistry, Georgian Court College, Lakewood, NJ, USA. philips@georgian.edu
Polypodium leucotomos has been reported to have antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and photoprotective properties. Exposure of skin to ultraviolet (UV) radiation can lead to deposition of excessive elastotic material, reduction in collagen, and increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs).
The goal of this research was to determine the effects of P. leucotomos in the absence or presence of UVA or UVB radiation on membrane damage, lipid peroxidation, and expression of elastin and MMP-1 in fibroblasts and keratinocytes, respectively.
Fibroblasts and keratinocytes, respectively, were irradiated by a single exposure to UVA (0.6, 1.8 or 3.6 J) or UVB radiation (0.75, 2.5 or 7.5 mJ), and then incubated with, or without, P. leucotomos (0.01, 0.1 and 1%) and examined for membrane damage, lipid peroxidation, expression of elastin (protein levels) and MMP-1 (protein levels or MMP-1 promoter activity).
UV radiation did not significantly alter membrane integrity, lipid peroxidation or MMP-1 expression, but increased elastin expression. P. leucotomos significantly improved membrane integrity, inhibited lipid peroxidation, increased elastin expression, and inhibited MMP-1 expression in both fibroblasts, and keratinocytes. The effects of P. leucotomos predominated in the presence of UVA or UVB in both fibroblasts and keratinocytes, respectively, with the exception of inhibition of MMP-1 protein levels in fibroblasts only in combination with UV radiation.
Lower concentration of P. leucotomos (lower than 0.1%), may be beneficial in preventing photoaging by improving membrane integrity and inhibiting MMP-1, without increasing elastin expression. Higher concentration (greater than 0.1%) of P. leucotomos may reverse the loss of normal elastic fibers associated with intrinsic aging.
Mid-dermal elastolysis: a clinical, histologic, and immunohistochemical study of 11 patients.
Our purpose was to report on the clinical and histologic features of 11 patients with mid-dermal elastolysis. Moreover, we analyzed by immunohistochemistry leukocyte subsets and expression of metalloproteinase (MMP) with the potential to degrade elastic tissue in 7 cases.
All patients were women with a mean age of 31.4 years. Disease duration ranged from 4 months to 17 years. Affected areas included the trunk, neck, and upper aspect of limbs. Two patients also had Hashimoto's thyroiditis and uterine carcinoma, respectively, whereas 1 patient had undergone silicone mammoplasty. In all patients, disease onset was associated with intense UV light exposure. Moderate leukocyte infiltration in the dermis was observed mostly in recent lesions and was composed of CD3(+) T cells and some CD68(+) macrophages with a normal number of factor XIIIa(+) dermal dendritic cells. Elastin, but not fibrillin-1 immunoreactivity disappeared from the mid dermis. MMP-9 was detected in epidermal keratinocytes and in the cytoplasm of large, angulated, multinucleated cells located in lesional dermis. These cells were negative for leukocyte, dendritic cell, macrophage, and T-cell markers and were absent in old lesions. Staining for MMP-7 and MMP-12 did not differ from control skin.
We aimed to establish an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for measuring soluble elastin fragments (sELAF) in serum and to reveal its usefulness in diagnosing acute aortic dissection (AAD).
An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to measure sELAF in serum was developed by using the newly created double monoclonal antibodies, which recognize the different epitopes of human aortic elastin. Twenty-five AAD patients, 50 patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), and 474 healthy individuals were enrolled in the study. The sELAF levels from healthy subjects gradually increased with aging. When the cutoff point for positivity was set at the mean+3 SD (ie, 3 SD above the mean in healthy subjects at each age), 16 AAD patients (64.0%) were found be positive, whereas only 1 AMI patient was found to be positive (2.0%). AAD patients with either an open or a partially open pseudolumen were found be 88.9% positive for sELAF, whereas those with its early closure were 0% positive. The difference in the sELAF levels between AAD patients with and without a thrombotic closure of false lumen was significant (60.3+/-15.6 versus 135.4+/-53.2 ng/mL, respectively; P&lt;0.005).
The sELAF level in serum may be a useful marker for helping in the diagnosis and screening of AAD and may also help to distinguish AAD from AMI.
Acute aortic dissection: the need for rapid, accurate, and readily available diagnostic strategies.
Acute aortic dissection: the need for rapid, accurate, and readily available diagnostic strategies.
Extracellular matrix remodeling and matrix metalloproteinases in the vascular wall during aging and in pathological conditions.
The extracellular matrix provides a structural framework essential for the functional properties of vessel walls. The three dimensional organization of the extracellular matrix molecules - elastin, collagens, proteoglycans and structural glycoproteins - synthesized during fetal development - is optimal for these functions. In uninjured arteries and veins, some proteases are constitutively expressed, but through the control of their activation and/or their inhibition by inhibitors, these proteases have a very low activity and the turn-over of elastic and collagen fibers is low. During aging and during the occurrence of vascular pathologies, the balance between proteases and their inhibitors is temporally destroyed through the induction of matrix metalloproteinase gene expression, the activation of zymogens or the secretion of enzymes by inflammatory cells. Smooth muscle cells, the most numerous cells in vascular walls, have a high ability to respond to injury through their ability to synthesize extracellular matrix molecules and protease inhibitors. However, the three dimensional organization of the newly synthesized extracellular matrix is never functionally optimal. In some other pathologies - aneurysm - the injury overcomes the responsive capacity of smooth muscle cells and the quantity of extracellular matrix decreases. In conclusion, care should be taken to maintain the vascular extracellular matrix reserve and any therapeutic manipulation of the protease/inhibitor balance must be perfectly controlled, because an accumulation of abnormal extracellular matrix may have unforeseen adverse effects.
The age-dependent vasodilatation and endothelial calcium influx induced by elastin peptides are modulated by extracellular glucose level.
Elastin peptides have been shown to produce many biological effects on various cell types, including an endothelium- and NO-dependent vasodilatation mediated by extracellular calcium influx and intracellular calcium elevation. Under normal concentration of extracellular glucose, the vasodilatory effect is observed in adult rats and is lost with age. Here, we have studied the consequences of extracellular glucose level changes on these effects triggered by elastin peptides (10(-4)-10(-3) mg ml(-1)), on 6- and 30-month-old rats, using the tension myography and the patch-clamp techniques. Our results show that low (0 mM) or high (33 mM) extracellular glucose concentrations abolish the extracellular calcium influx induced, under normal glucose level (11 mM), by the elastin peptides in cultured human endothelial cells. Also, low or high glucose abolish the vasodilatory action of elastin peptides observed on aorta rings from adult rats under normal glucose concentration. On the contrary, a dilation of aged rat aorta is observed in the presence of elastin peptides and high glucose, whereas such dilation is not observed when the elastin peptides are added in the presence of normal glucose concentration. In aging, a restoration by high glucose of the NO-dependent vasodilatation induced by elastin peptides could enhance the production of damaging peroxynitrite, potentially altering the structure and function of the blood vessels. These results could be of importance in the evaluation and treatment of aged patients with pathophysiological dysregulations of the circulating glucose level, such as in diabetes, age-related glucose intolerance, or low glucose levels caused by inappropriate glucose control treatments.
